as if he had recognized himself for the first time. He stood there
motionless and in wonder, dimly conscious that Hallward was speaking to
him, but not catching the meaning of his words. The sense of his own
beauty came on him like a revelation. He had never felt it before.
Basil Hallward's compliments had seemed to him to be merely the
charming exaggeration of friendship. He had listened to them, laughed
at them, forgotten them. They had not influenced his nature. Then had
come Lord Henry Wotton with his strange panegyric on youth, his
terrible warning of its brevity. That had stirred him at the time, and
now, as he stood gazing at the shadow of his own loveliness, the full
reality of the description flashed across him. Yes, there would be a
day when his face would be wrinkled and wizen, his eyes dim and
colourless, the grace of his figure broken and deformed. The scarlet
would pass away from his lips and the gold steal from his hair. The
life that was to make his soul would mar his body. He would become
dreadful, hideous, and uncouth.

As he thought of it, a sharp pang of pain struck through him like a
knife and made each delicate fibre of his nature quiver. His eyes
deepened into amethyst, and across them came a mist of tears. He felt
as if a hand of ice had been laid upon his heart.

"Don't you like it?" cried Hallward at last, stung a little by the
lad's silence, not understanding what it meant.

"Of course he likes it," said Lord Henry. "Who wouldn't like it? It is
one of the greatest things in modern art. I will give you anything you
like to ask for it. I must have it."

"It is not my property, Harry."

"Whose property is it?"

"Dorian's, of course," answered the painter.

"He is a very lucky fellow."

"How sad it is!" murmured Dorian Gray with his eyes still fixed upon
his own portrait. "How sad it is! I shall grow old, and horrible, and
dreadful. But this picture will remain always young. It will never be
older than this particular day of June.... If it were only the other
way! If it were I who was to be always young, and the picture that was
to grow old! For that-for that-I would give everything! Yes, there is
nothing in the whole world I would not give! I would give my soul for
that!"

"You would hardly care for such an arrangement, Basil," cried Lord
Henry, laughing. "It would be rather hard lines on your work."

"I should object very strongly, Harry," said Hallward.

Dorian Gray turned and looked at him. "I believe you would, Basil. You
like your art better than your friends. I am no more to you than a
green bronze figure. Hardly as much, I dare say."

The painter stared in amazement. It was so unlike Dorian to speak like
that. What had happened? He seemed quite angry. His face was flushed
and his cheeks burning.

"Yes," he continued, "I am less to you than your ivory Hermes or your
silver Faun. You will like them always. How long will you like me? Till
I have my first wrinkle, I suppose. I know, now, that when one loses
one's good looks, whatever they may be, one loses everything. Your
picture has taught me that. Lord Henry Wotton is perfectly right. Youth
is the only thing worth having. When I find that I am growing old, I
shall kill myself."

Hallward turned pale and caught his hand. "Dorian! Dorian!" he cried,
"don't talk like that. I have never had such a friend as you, and I
shall never have such another. You are not jealous of material things,
are you?-you who are finer than any of them!"

"I am jealous of everything whose beauty does not die. I am jealous of
the portrait you have painted of me. Why should it keep what I must
lose? Every moment that passes takes something from me and gives
something to it. Oh, if it were only the other way! If the picture
could change, and I could be always what I am now! Why did you paint
it? It will mock me some day-mock me horribly!" The hot tears welled
into his eyes; he tore his hand away and, flinging himself on the
divan, he buried his face in the cushions, as though he was praying.

"This is your doing, Harry," said the painter bitterly.

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. "It is the real Dorian Gray-that is
all."

"It is not."

"If it is not, what have I to do with it?"

"You should have gone away when I asked you," he muttered.

"I stayed when you asked me," was Lord Henry's answer.

"Harry, I can't quarrel with my two best friends at once, but between
you both you have made me hate the finest piece of work I have ever
done, and I will destroy it. What is it but canvas and colour? I will
not let it come across our three lives and mar them."

Dorian Gray lifted his golden head from the pillow, and with pallid
face and tear-stained eyes, looked at him as he walked over to the deal
painting-table that was set beneath the high curtained window. What was
he doing there? His fingers were straying about among the litter of tin
tubes and dry brushes, seeking for something. Yes, it was for the long
palette-knife, with its thin blade of lithe steel. He had found it at
last. He was going to rip up the canvas.

With a stifled sob the lad leaped from the couch, and, rushing over to
Hallward, tore the knife out of his hand, and flung it to the end of
the studio. "Don't, Basil, don't!" he cried. "It would be murder!"

"I am glad you appreciate my work at last, Dorian," said the painter
coldly when he had recovered from his surprise. "I never thought you
would."

"Appreciate it? I am in love with it, Basil. It is part of myself. I
feel that."

"Well, as soon as you are dry, you shall be varnished, and framed, and
sent home. Then you can do what you like with yourself." And he walked
across the room and rang the bell for tea. "You will have tea, of
course, Dorian? And so will you, Harry? Or do you object to such simple
pleasures?"

"I adore simple pleasures," said Lord Henry. "They are the last refuge
of the complex. But I don't like scenes, except on the stage. What
absurd fellows you are, both of you! I wonder who it was defined man as
a rational animal. It was the most premature definition ever given. Man
is many things, but he is not rational. I am glad he is not, after
all-though I wish you chaps would not squabble over the picture. You
had much better let me have it, Basil. This silly boy doesn't really
want it, and I really do."

"If you let any one have it but me, Basil, I shall never forgive you!"
cried Dorian Gray; "and I don't allow people to call me a silly boy."

"You know the picture is yours, Dorian. I gave it to you before it
existed."

"And you know you have been a little silly, Mr. Gray, and that you
don't really object to being reminded that you are extremely young."

"I should have objected very strongly this morning, Lord Henry."

"Ah! this morning! You have lived since then."

There came a knock at the door, and the butler entered with a laden
tea-tray and set it down upon a small Japanese table. There was a
rattle of cups and saucers and the hissing of a fluted Georgian urn.
Two globe-shaped china dishes were brought in by a page. Dorian Gray
went over and poured out the tea. The two men sauntered languidly to
the table and examined what was under the covers.

"Let us go to the theatre to-night," said Lord Henry. "There is sure to
be something on, somewhere. I have promised to dine at White's, but it
is only with an old friend, so I can send him a wire to say that I am
ill, or that I am prevented from coming in consequence of a subsequent
engagement. I think that would be a rather nice excuse: it would have
all the surprise of candour."

"It is such a bore putting on one's dress-clothes," muttered Hallward.
"And, when one has them on, they are so horrid."

"Yes," answered Lord Henry dreamily, "the costume of the nineteenth
century is detestable. It is so sombre, so depressing. Sin is the only
real colour-element left in modern life."

"You really must not say things like that before Dorian, Harry."

"Before which Dorian? The one who is pouring out tea for us, or the one
in the picture?"

"Before either."

"I should like to come to the theatre with you, Lord Henry," said the
lad.

"Then you shall come; and you will come, too, Basil, won't you?"

"I can't, really. I would sooner not. I have a lot of work to do."

"Well, then, you and I will go alone, Mr. Gray."

"I should like that awfully."

The painter bit his lip and walked over, cup in hand, to the picture.
"I shall stay with the real Dorian," he said, sadly.

"Is it the real Dorian?" cried the original of the portrait, strolling
across to him. "Am I really like that?"

"Yes; you are just like that."

"How wonderful, Basil!"

"At least you are like it in appearance. But it will never alter,"
sighed Hallward. "That is something."

"What a fuss people make about fidelity!" exclaimed Lord Henry. "Why,
even in love it is purely a question for physiology. It has nothing to
do with our own will. Young men want to be faithful, and are not; old
men want to be faithless, and cannot: that is all one can say."

"Don't go to the theatre to-night, Dorian," said Hallward. "Stop and
dine with me."

"I can't, Basil."

"Why?"

"Because I have promised Lord Henry Wotton to go with him."

"He won't like you the better for keeping your promises. He always
breaks his own. I beg you not to go."

Dorian Gray laughed and shook his head.

"I entreat you."

The lad hesitated, and looked over at Lord Henry, who was watching them
from the tea-table with an amused smile.

"I must go, Basil," he answered.

"Very well," said Hallward, and he went over and laid down his cup on
the tray. "It is rather late, and, as you have to dress, you had better
lose no time. Good-bye, Harry. Good-bye, Dorian. Come and see me soon.
Come to-morrow."

"Certainly."

"You won't forget?"

"No, of course not," cried Dorian.

"And ... Harry!"

"Yes, Basil?"

"Remember what I asked you, when we were in the garden this morning."

"I have forgotten it."

"I trust you."

"I wish I could trust myself," said Lord Henry, laughing. "Come, Mr.
Gray, my hansom is outside, and I can drop you at your own place.
Good-bye, Basil. It has been a most interesting afternoon."

As the door closed behind them, the painter flung himself down on a
sofa, and a look of pain came into his face.




CHAPTER III.


At half-past twelve next day Lord Henry Wotton strolled from Curzon
Street over to the Albany to call on his uncle, Lord Fermor, a genial
if somewhat rough-mannered old bachelor, whom the outside world called
selfish because it derived no particular benefit from him, but who was
considered generous by Society as he fed the people who amused him. His
father had been our ambassador at Madrid when Isabella was young and
Prim unthought of, but had retired from the diplomatic service in a
capricious moment of annoyance on not being offered the Embassy at
Paris, a post to which he considered that he was fully entitled by
reason of his birth, his indolence, the good English of his dispatches,
and his inordinate passion for pleasure. The son, who had been his
father's secretary, had resigned along with his chief, somewhat
foolishly as was thought at the time, and on succeeding some months
later to the title, had set himself to the serious study of the great
aristocratic art of doing absolutely nothing. He had two large town
houses, but preferred to live in chambers as it was less trouble, and
took most of his meals at his club. He paid some attention to the
management of his collieries in the Midland counties, excusing himself
for this taint of industry on the ground that the one advantage of
having coal was that it enabled a gentleman to afford the decency of
burning wood on his own hearth. In politics he was a Tory, except when
the Tories were in office, during which period he roundly abused them
for being a pack of Radicals. He was a hero to his valet, who bullied
him, and a terror to most of his relations, whom he bullied in turn.
Only England could have produced him, and he always said that the
country was going to the dogs. His principles were out of date, but
there was a good deal to be said for his prejudices.

When Lord Henry entered the room, he found his uncle sitting in a rough
shooting-coat, smoking a cheroot and grumbling over _The Times_. "Well,
Harry," said the old gentleman, "what brings you out so early? I
thought you dandies never got up till two, and were not visible till
five."

"Pure family affection, I assure you, Uncle George. I want to get
something out of you."

"Money, I suppose," said Lord Fermor, making a wry face. "Well, sit
down and tell me all about it. Young people, nowadays, imagine that
money is everything."

"Yes," murmured Lord Henry, settling his button-hole in his coat; "and
when they grow older they know it. But I don't want money. It is only
people who pay their bills who want that, Uncle George, and I never pay
mine. Credit is the capital of a younger son, and one lives charmingly
upon it. Besides, I always deal with Dartmoor's tradesmen, and
consequently they never bother me. What I want is information: not
useful information, of course; useless information."

"Well, I can tell you anything that is in an English Blue Book, Harry,
although those fellows nowadays write a lot of nonsense. When I was in
the Diplomatic, things were much better. But I hear they let them in
now by examination. What can you expect? Examinations, sir, are pure
humbug from beginning to end. If a man is a gentleman, he knows quite
enough, and if he is not a gentleman, whatever he knows is bad for
him."

"Mr. Dorian Gray does not belong to Blue Books, Uncle George," said
Lord Henry languidly.

"Mr. Dorian Gray? Who is he?" asked Lord Fermor, knitting his bushy
white eyebrows.

"That is what I have come to learn, Uncle George. Or rather, I know who
he is. He is the last Lord Kelso's grandson. His mother was a Devereux,
Lady Margaret Devereux. I want you to tell me about his mother. What
was she like? Whom did she marry? You have known nearly everybody in
your time, so you might have known her. I am very much interested in
Mr. Gray at present. I have only just met him."

"Kelso's grandson!" echoed the old gentleman. "Kelso's grandson! ... Of
course.... I knew his mother intimately. I believe I was at her
christening. She was an extraordinarily beautiful girl, Margaret
Devereux, and made all the men frantic by running away with a penniless
young fellow-a mere nobody, sir, a subaltern in a foot regiment, or
something of that kind. Certainly. I remember the whole thing as if it
happened yesterday. The poor chap was killed in a duel at Spa a few
months after the marriage. There was an ugly story about it. They said
Kelso got some rascally adventurer, some Belgian brute, to insult his
son-in-law in public-paid him, sir, to do it, paid him-and that the
fellow spitted his man as if he had been a pigeon. The thing was hushed
up, but, egad, Kelso ate his chop alone at the club for some time
afterwards. He brought his daughter back with him, I was told, and she
never spoke to him again. Oh, yes; it was a bad business. The girl
died, too, died within a year. So she left a son, did she? I had
forgotten that. What sort of boy is he? If he is like his mother, he
must be a good-looking chap."

"He is very good-looking," assented Lord Henry.

"I hope he will fall into proper hands," continued the old man. "He
should have a pot of money waiting for him if Kelso did the right thing
by him. His mother had money, too. All the Selby property came to her,
through her grandfather. Her grandfather hated Kelso, thought him a
mean dog. He was, too. Came to Madrid once when I was there. Egad, I
was ashamed of him. The Queen used to ask me about the English noble
who was always quarrelling with the cabmen about their fares. They made
quite a story of it. I didn't dare show my face at Court for a month. I
hope he treated his grandson better than he did the jarvies."

"I don't know," answered Lord Henry. "I fancy that the boy will be well
off. He is not of age yet. He has Selby, I know. He told me so. And ...
his mother was very beautiful?"

"Margaret Devereux was one of the loveliest creatures I ever saw,
Harry. What on earth induced her to behave as she did, I never could
understand. She could have married anybody she chose. Carlington was
mad after her. She was romantic, though. All the women of that family
were. The men were a poor lot, but, egad! the women were wonderful.
Carlington went on his knees to her. Told me so himself. She laughed at
him, and there wasn't a girl in London at the time who wasn't after
him. And by the way, Harry, talking about silly marriages, what is this
humbug your father tells me about Dartmoor wanting to marry an
American? Ain't English girls good enough for him?"

"It is rather fashionable to marry Americans just now, Uncle George."

"I'll back English women against the world, Harry," said Lord Fermor,
striking the table with his fist.

"The betting is on the Americans."

"They don't last, I am told," muttered his uncle.

"A long engagement exhausts them, but they are capital at a
steeplechase. They take things flying. I don't think Dartmoor has a
chance."

"Who are her people?" grumbled the old gentleman. "Has she got any?"

Lord Henry shook his head. "American girls are as clever at concealing
their parents, as English women are at concealing their past," he said,
rising to go.

"They are pork-packers, I suppose?"

"I hope so, Uncle George, for Dartmoor's sake. I am told that
pork-packing is the most lucrative profession in America, after
politics."

"Is she pretty?"

"She behaves as if she was beautiful. Most American women do. It is the
secret of their charm."

"Why can't these American women stay in their own country? They are
always telling us that it is the paradise for women."

"It is. That is the reason why, like Eve, they are so excessively
anxious to get out of it," said Lord Henry. "Good-bye, Uncle George. I
shall be late for lunch, if I stop any longer. Thanks for giving me the
information I wanted. I always like to know everything about my new
friends, and nothing about my old ones."

"Where are you lunching, Harry?"

"At Aunt Agatha's. I have asked myself and Mr. Gray. He is her latest
_prot'eg'e_."

"Humph! tell your Aunt Agatha, Harry, not to bother me any more with
her charity appeals. I am sick of them. Why, the good woman thinks that
I have nothing to do but to write cheques for her silly fads."

"All right, Uncle George, I'll tell her, but it won't have any effect.
Philanthropic people lose all sense of humanity. It is their
distinguishing characteristic."

The old gentleman growled approvingly and rang the bell for his
servant. Lord Henry passed up the low arcade into Burlington Street and
turned his steps in the direction of Berkeley Square.

So that was the story of Dorian Gray's parentage. Crudely as it had
been told to him, it had yet stirred him by its suggestion of a
strange, almost modern romance. A beautiful woman risking everything
for a mad passion. A few wild weeks of happiness cut short by a
hideous, treacherous crime. Months of voiceless agony, and then a child
born in pain. The mother snatched away by death, the boy left to
solitude and the tyranny of an old and loveless man. Yes; it was an
interesting background. It posed the lad, made him more perfect, as it
were. Behind every exquisite thing that existed, there was something
tragic. Worlds had to be in travail, that the meanest flower might
blow.... And how charming he had been at dinner the night before, as
with startled eyes and lips parted in frightened pleasure he had sat
opposite to him at the club, the red candleshades staining to a richer
rose the wakening wonder of his face. Talking to him was like playing
upon an exquisite violin. He answered to every touch and thrill of the
bow.... There was something terribly enthralling in the exercise of
influence. No other activity was like it. To project one's soul into
some gracious form, and let it tarry there for a moment; to hear one's
own intellectual views echoed back to one with all the added music of
passion and youth; to convey one's temperament into another as though
it were a subtle fluid or a strange perfume: there was a real joy in
that-perhaps the most satisfying joy left to us in an age so limited
and vulgar as our own, an age grossly carnal in its pleasures, and
grossly common in its aims.... He was a marvellous type, too, this lad,
whom by so curious a chance he had met in Basil's studio, or could be
fashioned into a marvellous type, at any rate. Grace was his, and the
white purity of boyhood, and beauty such as old Greek marbles kept for
us. There was nothing that one could not do with him. He could be made
a Titan or a toy. What a pity it was that such beauty was destined to
fade! ... And Basil? From a psychological point of view, how
interesting he was! The new manner in art, the fresh mode of looking at
life, suggested so strangely by the merely visible presence of one who
was unconscious of it all; the silent spirit that dwelt in dim
woodland, and walked unseen in open field, suddenly showing herself,
Dryadlike and not afraid, because in his soul who sought for her there
had been wakened that wonderful vision to which alone are wonderful
things revealed; the mere shapes and patterns of things becoming, as it
were, refined, and gaining a kind of symbolical value, as though they
were themselves patterns of some other and more perfect form whose
shadow they made real: how strange it all was! He remembered something
like it in history. Was it not Plato, that artist in thought, who had
first analyzed it? Was it not Buonarotti who had carved it in the
coloured marbles of a sonnet-sequence? But in our own century it was
strange.... Yes; he would try to be to Dorian Gray what, without
knowing it, the lad was to the painter who had fashioned the wonderful
portrait. He would seek to dominate him-had already, indeed, half done
so. He would make that wonderful spirit his own. There was something
fascinating in this son of love and death.

Suddenly he stopped and glanced up at the houses. He found that he had
passed his aunt's some distance, and, smiling to himself, turned back.
When he entered the somewhat sombre hall, the butler told him that they
had gone in to lunch. He gave one of the footmen his hat and stick and
passed into the dining-room.

"Late as usual, Harry," cried his aunt, shaking her head at him.

He invented a facile excuse, and having taken the vacant seat next to
her, looked round to see who was there. Dorian bowed to him shyly from
the end of the table, a flush of pleasure stealing into his cheek.
Opposite was the Duchess of Harley, a lady of admirable good-nature and
good temper, much liked by every one who knew her, and of those ample
architectural proportions that in women who are not duchesses are
described by contemporary historians as stoutness. Next to her sat, on
her right, Sir Thomas Burdon, a Radical member of Parliament, who
followed his leader in public life and in private life followed the
best cooks, dining with the Tories and thinking with the Liberals, in
accordance with a wise and well-known rule. The post on her left was
occupied by Mr. Erskine of Treadley, an old gentleman of considerable
charm and culture, who had fallen, however, into bad habits of silence,
having, as he explained once to Lady Agatha, said everything that he
had to say before he was thirty. His own neighbour was Mrs. Vandeleur,
one of his aunt's oldest friends, a perfect saint amongst women, but so
dreadfully dowdy that she reminded one of a badly bound hymn-book.
Fortunately for him she had on the other side Lord Faudel, a most
intelligent middle-aged mediocrity, as bald as a ministerial statement
in the House of Commons, with whom she was conversing in that intensely
earnest manner which is the one unpardonable error, as he remarked once
himself, that all really good people fall into, and from which none of
them ever quite escape.

"We are talking about poor Dartmoor, Lord Henry," cried the duchess,
nodding pleasantly to him across the table. "Do you think he will
really marry this fascinating young person?"

"I believe she has made up her mind to propose to him, Duchess."

"How dreadful!" exclaimed Lady Agatha. "Really, some one should
interfere."

"I am told, on excellent authority, that her father keeps an American
dry-goods store," said Sir Thomas Burdon, looking supercilious.

"My uncle has already suggested pork-packing, Sir Thomas."

"Dry-goods! What are American dry-goods?" asked the duchess, raising
her large hands in wonder and accentuating the verb.

"American novels," answered Lord Henry, helping himself to some quail.

The duchess looked puzzled.

"Don't mind him, my dear," whispered Lady Agatha. "He never means
anything that he says."

"When America was discovered," said the Radical member-and he began to
give some wearisome facts. Like all people who try to exhaust a
subject, he exhausted his listeners. The duchess sighed and exercised
her privilege of interruption. "I wish to goodness it never had been
discovered at all!" she exclaimed. "Really, our girls have no chance
nowadays. It is most unfair."

"Perhaps, after all, America never has been discovered," said Mr.
Erskine; "I myself would say that it had merely been detected."

"Oh! but I have seen specimens of the inhabitants," answered the
duchess vaguely. "I must confess that most of them are extremely
pretty. And they dress well, too. They get all their dresses in Paris.
I wish I could afford to do the same."

"They say that when good Americans die they go to Paris," chuckled Sir
Thomas, who had a large wardrobe of Humour's cast-off clothes.

"Really! And where do bad Americans go to when they die?" inquired the
duchess.

"They go to America," murmured Lord Henry.

Sir Thomas frowned. "I am afraid that your nephew is prejudiced against
that great country," he said to Lady Agatha. "I have travelled all over
it in cars provided by the directors, who, in such matters, are
extremely civil. I assure you that it is an education to visit it."

"But must we really see Chicago in order to be educated?" asked Mr.
Erskine plaintively. "I don't feel up to the journey."

Sir Thomas waved his hand. "Mr. Erskine of Treadley has the world on
his shelves. We practical men like to see things, not to read about
them. The Americans are an extremely interesting people. They are
absolutely reasonable. I think that is their distinguishing
characteristic. Yes, Mr. Erskine, an absolutely reasonable people. I
assure you there is no nonsense about the Americans."

"How dreadful!" cried Lord Henry. "I can stand brute force, but brute
reason is quite unbearable. There is something unfair about its use. It
is hitting below the intellect."

"I do not understand you," said Sir Thomas, growing rather red.

"I do, Lord Henry," murmured Mr. Erskine, with a smile.

"Paradoxes are all very well in their way...." rejoined the baronet.

"Was that a paradox?" asked Mr. Erskine. "I did not think so. Perhaps
it was. Well, the way of paradoxes is the way of truth. To test reality
we must see it on the tight rope. When the verities become acrobats, we
can judge them."

"Dear me!" said Lady Agatha, "how you men argue! I am sure I never can
make out what you are talking about. Oh! Harry, I am quite vexed with
you. Why do you try to persuade our nice Mr. Dorian Gray to give up the
East End? I assure you he would be quite invaluable. They would love
his playing."

"I want him to play to me," cried Lord Henry, smiling, and he looked
down the table and caught a bright answering glance.

"But they are so unhappy in Whitechapel," continued Lady Agatha.

"I can sympathize with everything except suffering," said Lord Henry,
shrugging his shoulders. "I cannot sympathize with that. It is too
ugly, too horrible, too distressing. There is something terribly morbid
in the modern sympathy with pain. One should sympathize with the
colour, the beauty, the joy of life. The less said about life's sores,
the better."

"Still, the East End is a very important problem," remarked Sir Thomas
with a grave shake of the head.

"Quite so," answered the young lord. "It is the problem of slavery, and
we try to solve it by amusing the slaves."

The politician looked at him keenly. "What change do you propose,
then?" he asked.

Lord Henry laughed. "I don't desire to change anything in England
except the weather," he answered. "I am quite content with philosophic
contemplation. But, as the nineteenth century has gone bankrupt through
an over-expenditure of sympathy, I would suggest that we should appeal
to science to put us straight. The advantage of the emotions is that
they lead us astray, and the advantage of science is that it is not
emotional."

"But we have such grave responsibilities," ventured Mrs. Vandeleur
timidly.

"Terribly grave," echoed Lady Agatha.

Lord Henry looked over at Mr. Erskine. "Humanity takes itself too
seriously. It is the world's original sin. If the caveman had known how
to laugh, history would have been different."

"You are really very comforting," warbled the duchess. "I have always
felt rather guilty when I came to see your dear aunt, for I take no
interest at all in the East End. For the future I shall be able to look
her in the face without a blush."

"A blush is very becoming, Duchess," remarked Lord Henry.

"Only when one is young," she answered. "When an old woman like myself
blushes, it is a very bad sign. Ah! Lord Henry, I wish you would tell
me how to become young again."

He thought for a moment. "Can you remember any great error that you
committed in your early days, Duchess?" he asked, looking at her across
the table.

"A great many, I fear," she cried.

"Then commit them over again," he said gravely. "To get back one's
youth, one has merely to repeat one's follies."

"A delightful theory!" she exclaimed. "I must put it into practice."

"A dangerous theory!" came from Sir Thomas's tight lips. Lady Agatha
shook her head, but could not help being amused. Mr. Erskine listened.

"Yes," he continued, "that is one of the great secrets of life.
Nowadays most people die of a sort of creeping common sense, and
discover when it is too late that the only things one never regrets are
one's mistakes."

A laugh ran round the table.

He played with the idea and grew wilful; tossed it into the air and
transformed it; let it escape and recaptured it; made it iridescent
with fancy and winged it with paradox. The praise of folly, as he went
on, soared into a philosophy, and philosophy herself became young, and
catching the mad music of pleasure, wearing, one might fancy, her
wine-stained robe and wreath of ivy, danced like a Bacchante over the
hills of life, and mocked the slow Silenus for being sober. Facts fled
before her like frightened forest things. Her white feet trod the huge
press at which wise Omar sits, till the seething grape-juice rose round
her bare limbs in waves of purple bubbles, or crawled in red foam over
the vat's black, dripping, sloping sides. It was an extraordinary
improvisation. He felt that the eyes of Dorian Gray were fixed on him,
and the consciousness that amongst his audience there was one whose
temperament he wished to fascinate seemed to give his wit keenness and
to lend colour to his imagination. He was brilliant, fantastic,
irresponsible. He charmed his listeners out of themselves, and they
followed his pipe, laughing. Dorian Gray never took his gaze off him,
but sat like one under a spell, smiles chasing each other over his lips
and wonder growing grave in his darkening eyes.

At last, liveried in the costume of the age, reality entered the room
in the shape of a servant to tell the duchess that her carriage was
waiting. She wrung her hands in mock despair. "How annoying!" she
cried. "I must go. I have to call for my husband at the club, to take
him to some absurd meeting at Willis's Rooms, where he is going to be
in the chair. If I am late he is sure to be furious, and I couldn't
have a scene in this bonnet. It is far too fragile. A harsh word would
ruin it. No, I must go, dear Agatha. Good-bye, Lord Henry, you are
quite delightful and dreadfully demoralizing. I am sure I don't know
what to say about your views. You must come and dine with us some
night. Tuesday? Are you disengaged Tuesday?"

"For you I would throw over anybody, Duchess," said Lord Henry with a
bow.

"Ah! that is very nice, and very wrong of you," she cried; "so mind you
come"; and she swept out of the room, followed by Lady Agatha and the
other ladies.

When Lord Henry had sat down again, Mr. Erskine moved round, and taking
a chair close to him, placed his hand upon his arm.

"You talk books away," he said; "why don't you write one?"

"I am too fond of reading books to care to write them, Mr. Erskine. I
should like to write a novel certainly, a novel that would be as lovely
as a Persian carpet and as unreal. But there is no literary public in
England for anything except newspapers, primers, and encyclopaedias. Of
all people in the world the English have the least sense of the beauty
of literature."

"I fear you are right," answered Mr. Erskine. "I myself used to have
literary ambitions, but I gave them up long ago. And now, my dear young
friend, if you will allow me to call you so, may I ask if you really
meant all that you said to us at lunch?"

"I quite forget what I said," smiled Lord Henry. "Was it all very bad?"

"Very bad indeed. In fact I consider you extremely dangerous, and if
anything happens to our good duchess, we shall all look on you as being
primarily responsible. But I should like to talk to you about life. The
generation into which I was born was tedious. Some day, when you are
tired of London, come down to Treadley and expound to me your
philosophy of pleasure over some admirable Burgundy I am fortunate
enough to possess."

"I shall be charmed. A visit to Treadley would be a great privilege. It
has a perfect host, and a perfect library."

"You will complete it," answered the old gentleman with a courteous
bow. "And now I must bid good-bye to your excellent aunt. I am due at
the Athenaeum. It is the hour when we sleep there."

"All of you, Mr. Erskine?"

"Forty of us, in forty arm-chairs. We are practising for an English
Academy of Letters."

Lord Henry laughed and rose. "I am going to the park," he cried.

As he was passing out of the door, Dorian Gray touched him on the arm.
"Let me come with you," he murmured.

"But I thought you had promised Basil Hallward to go and see him,"
answered Lord Henry.

"I would sooner come with you; yes, I feel I must come with you. Do let
me. And you will promise to talk to me all the time? No one talks so
wonderfully as you do."

"Ah! I have talked quite enough for to-day," said Lord Henry, smiling.
"All I want now is to look at life. You may come and look at it with
me, if you care to."




CHAPTER IV.


One afternoon, a month later, Dorian Gray was reclining in a luxurious
arm-chair, in the little library of Lord Henry's house in Mayfair. It
was, in its way, a very charming room, with its high panelled
wainscoting of olive-stained oak, its cream-coloured frieze and ceiling
of raised plasterwork, and its brickdust felt carpet strewn with silk,
long-fringed Persian rugs. On a tiny satinwood table stood a statuette
by Clodion, and beside it lay a copy of Les Cent Nouvelles, bound for
Margaret of Valois by Clovis Eve and powdered with the gilt daisies
that Queen had selected for her device. Some large blue china jars and
parrot-tulips were ranged on the mantelshelf, and through the small
leaded panes of the window streamed the apricot-coloured light of a
summer day in London.

Lord Henry had not yet come in. He was always late on principle, his
principle being that punctuality is the thief of time. So the lad was
looking rather sulky, as with listless fingers he turned over the pages
of an elaborately illustrated edition of Manon Lescaut that he had
found in one of the book-cases. The formal monotonous ticking of the
Louis Quatorze clock annoyed him. Once or twice he thought of going
away.

At last he heard a step outside, and the door opened. "How late you
are, Harry!" he murmured.

"I am afraid it is not Harry, Mr. Gray," answered a shrill voice.

He glanced quickly round and rose to his feet. "I beg your pardon. I
thought-"

"You thought it was my husband. It is only his wife. You must let me
introduce myself. I know you quite well by your photographs. I think my
husband has got seventeen of them."

"Not seventeen, Lady Henry?"

"Well, eighteen, then. And I saw you with him the other night at the
opera." She laughed nervously as she spoke, and watched him with her
vague forget-me-not eyes. She was a curious woman, whose dresses always
looked as if they had been designed in a rage and put on in a tempest.
She was usually in love with somebody, and, as her passion was never
returned, she had kept all her illusions. She tried to look
picturesque, but only succeeded in being untidy. Her name was Victoria,
and she had a perfect mania for going to church.

"That was at Lohengrin, Lady Henry, I think?"

"Yes; it was at dear Lohengrin. I like Wagner's music better than
anybody's. It is so loud that one can talk the whole time without other
people hearing what one says. That is a great advantage, don't you
think so, Mr. Gray?"

The same nervous staccato laugh broke from her thin lips, and her
fingers began to play with a long tortoise-shell paper-knife.

Dorian smiled and shook his head: "I am afraid I don't think so, Lady
Henry. I never talk during music-at least, during good music. If one
hears bad music, it is one's duty to drown it in conversation."

"Ah! that is one of Harry's views, isn't it, Mr. Gray? I always hear
Harry's views from his friends. It is the only way I get to know of
them. But you must not think I don't like good music. I adore it, but I
am afraid of it. It makes me too romantic. I have simply worshipped
pianists-two at a time, sometimes, Harry tells me. I don't know what it
is about them. Perhaps it is that they are foreigners. They all are,
ain't they? Even those that are born in England become foreigners after
a time, don't they? It is so clever of them, and such a compliment to
art. Makes it quite cosmopolitan, doesn't it? You have never been to
any of my parties, have you, Mr. Gray? You must come. I can't afford
orchids, but I spare no expense in foreigners. They make one's rooms
look so picturesque. But here is Harry! Harry, I came in to look for
you, to ask you something-I forget what it was-and I found Mr. Gray
here. We have had such a pleasant chat about music. We have quite the
same ideas. No; I think our ideas are quite different. But he has been
most pleasant. I am so glad I've seen him."

"I am charmed, my love, quite charmed," said Lord Henry, elevating his
dark, crescent-shaped eyebrows and looking at them both with an amused
smile. "So sorry I am late, Dorian. I went to look after a piece of old
brocade in Wardour Street and had to bargain for hours for it. Nowadays
people know the price of everything and the value of nothing."

"I am afraid I must be going," exclaimed Lady Henry, breaking an
awkward silence with her silly sudden laugh. "I have promised to drive
with the duchess. Good-bye, Mr. Gray. Good-bye, Harry. You are dining
out, I suppose? So am I. Perhaps I shall see you at Lady Thornbury's."

"I dare say, my dear," said Lord Henry, shutting the door behind her
as, looking like a bird of paradise that had been out all night in the
rain, she flitted out of the room, leaving a faint odour of
frangipanni. Then he lit a cigarette and flung himself down on the
sofa.

"Never marry a woman with straw-coloured hair, Dorian," he said after a
few puffs.

"Why, Harry?"

"Because they are so sentimental."

"But I like sentimental people."

"Never marry at all, Dorian. Men marry because they are tired; women,
because they are curious: both are disappointed."

"I don't think I am likely to marry, Harry. I am too much in love. That
is one of your aphorisms. I am putting it into practice, as I do
everything that you say."

"Who are you in love with?" asked Lord Henry after a pause.

"With an actress," said Dorian Gray, blushing.

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. "That is a rather commonplace
_d'ebut_."

"You would not say so if you saw her, Harry."

"Who is she?"

"Her name is Sibyl Vane."

"Never heard of her."

"No one has. People will some day, however. She is a genius."

"My dear boy, no woman is a genius. Women are a decorative sex. They
never have anything to say, but they say it charmingly. Women represent
the triumph of matter over mind, just as men represent the triumph of
mind over morals."

"Harry, how can you?"

"My dear Dorian, it is quite true. I am analysing women at present, so
I ought to know. The subject is not so abstruse as I thought it was. I
find that, ultimately, there are only two kinds of women, the plain and
the coloured. The plain women are very useful. If you want to gain a
reputation for respectability, you have merely to take them down to
supper. The other women are very charming. They commit one mistake,
however. They paint in order to try and look young. Our grandmothers
painted in order to try and talk brilliantly. _Rouge_ and _esprit_ used
to go together. That is all over now. As long as a woman can look ten
years younger than her own daughter, she is perfectly satisfied. As for
conversation, there are only five women in London worth talking to, and
two of these can't be admitted into decent society. However, tell me
about your genius. How long have you known her?"

"Ah! Harry, your views terrify me."

"Never mind that. How long have you known her?"

"About three weeks."

"And where did you come across her?"

"I will tell you, Harry, but you mustn't be unsympathetic about it.
After all, it never would have happened if I had not met you. You
filled me with a wild desire to know everything about life. For days
after I met you, something seemed to throb in my veins. As I lounged in
the park, or strolled down Piccadilly, I used to look at every one who
passed me and wonder, with a mad curiosity, what sort of lives they
led. Some of them fascinated me. Others filled me with terror. There
was an exquisite poison in the air. I had a passion for sensations....
Well, one evening about seven o'clock, I determined to go out in search
of some adventure. I felt that this grey monstrous London of ours, with
its myriads of people, its sordid sinners, and its splendid sins, as
you once phrased it, must have something in store for me. I fancied a
thousand things. The mere danger gave me a sense of delight. I
remembered what you had said to me on that wonderful evening when we
first dined together, about the search for beauty being the real secret
of life. I don't know what I expected, but I went out and wandered
eastward, soon losing my way in a labyrinth of grimy streets and black
grassless squares. About half-past eight I passed by an absurd little
theatre, with great flaring gas-jets and gaudy play-bills. A hideous
Jew, in the most amazing waistcoat I ever beheld in my life, was
standing at the entrance, smoking a vile cigar. He had greasy ringlets,
and an enormous diamond blazed in the centre of a soiled shirt. 'Have a
box, my Lord?' he said, when he saw me, and he took off his hat with an
air of gorgeous servility. There was something about him, Harry, that
amused me. He was such a monster. You will laugh at me, I know, but I
really went in and paid a whole guinea for the stage-box. To the
present day I can't make out why I did so; and yet if I hadn't-my dear
Harry, if I hadn't-I should have missed the greatest romance of my
life. I see you are laughing. It is horrid of you!"

"I am not laughing, Dorian; at least I am not laughing at you. But you
should not say the greatest romance of your life. You should say the
first romance of your life. You will always be loved, and you will
always be in love with love. A _grande passion_ is the privilege of
people who have nothing to do. That is the one use of the idle classes
of a country. Don't be afraid. There are exquisite things in store for
you. This is merely the beginning."

"Do you think my nature so shallow?" cried Dorian Gray angrily.

"No; I think your nature so deep."

"How do you mean?"

"My dear boy, the people who love only once in their lives are really
the shallow people. What they call their loyalty, and their fidelity, I
call either the lethargy of custom or their lack of imagination.
Faithfulness is to the emotional life what consistency is to the life
of the intellect-simply a confession of failure. Faithfulness! I must
analyse it some day. The passion for property is in it. There are many
things that we would throw away if we were not afraid that others might
pick them up. But I don't want to interrupt you. Go on with your
story."

"Well, I found myself seated in a horrid little private box, with a
vulgar drop-scene staring me in the face. I looked out from behind the
curtain and surveyed the house. It was a tawdry affair, all Cupids and
cornucopias, like a third-rate wedding-cake. The gallery and pit were
fairly full, but the two rows of dingy stalls were quite empty, and
there was hardly a person in what I suppose they called the
dress-circle. Women went about with oranges and ginger-beer, and there
was a terrible consumption of nuts going on."

"It must have been just like the palmy days of the British drama."

"Just like, I should fancy, and very depressing. I began to wonder what
on earth I should do when I caught sight of the play-bill. What do you
think the play was, Harry?"

"I should think 'The Idiot Boy', or 'Dumb but Innocent'. Our fathers
used to like that sort of piece, I believe. The longer I live, Dorian,
the more keenly I feel that whatever was good enough for our fathers is
not good enough for us. In art, as in politics, _les grandp`eres ont
toujours tort_."

"This play was good enough for us, Harry. It was Romeo and Juliet. I
must admit that I was rather annoyed at the idea of seeing Shakespeare
done in such a wretched hole of a place. Still, I felt interested, in a
sort of way. At any rate, I determined to wait for the first act. There
was a dreadful orchestra, presided over by a young Hebrew who sat at a
cracked piano, that nearly drove me away, but at last the drop-scene
was drawn up and the play began. Romeo was a stout elderly gentleman,
with corked eyebrows, a husky tragedy voice, and a figure like a
beer-barrel. Mercutio was almost as bad. He was played by the
low-comedian, who had introduced gags of his own and was on most
friendly terms with the pit. They were both as grotesque as the
scenery, and that looked as if it had come out of a country-booth. But
Juliet! Harry, imagine a girl, hardly seventeen years of age, with a
little, flowerlike face, a small Greek head with plaited coils of
dark-brown hair, eyes that were violet wells of passion, lips that were
like the petals of a rose. She was the loveliest thing I had ever seen
in my life. You said to me once that pathos left you unmoved, but that
beauty, mere beauty, could fill your eyes with tears. I tell you,
Harry, I could hardly see this girl for the mist of tears that came
across me. And her voice-I never heard such a voice. It was very low at
first, with deep mellow notes that seemed to fall singly upon one's
ear. Then it became a little louder, and sounded like a flute or a
distant hautboy. In the garden-scene it had all the tremulous ecstasy
that one hears just before dawn when nightingales are singing. There
were moments, later on, when it had the wild passion of violins. You
know how a voice can stir one. Your voice and the voice of Sibyl Vane
are two things that I shall never forget. When I close my eyes, I hear
them, and each of them says something different. I don't know which to
follow. Why should I not love her? Harry, I do love her. She is
everything to me in life. Night after night I go to see her play. One
evening she is Rosalind, and the next evening she is Imogen. I have
seen her die in the gloom of an Italian tomb, sucking the poison from
her lover's lips. I have watched her wandering through the forest of
Arden, disguised as a pretty boy in hose and doublet and dainty cap.
She has been mad, and has come into the presence of a guilty king, and
given him rue to wear and bitter herbs to taste of. She has been
innocent, and the black hands of jealousy have crushed her reedlike
throat. I have seen her in every age and in every costume. Ordinary
women never appeal to one's imagination. They are limited to their
century. No glamour ever transfigures them. One knows their minds as
easily as one knows their bonnets. One can always find them. There is
no mystery in any of them. They ride in the park in the morning and
chatter at tea-parties in the afternoon. They have their stereotyped
smile and their fashionable manner. They are quite obvious. But an
actress! How different an actress is! Harry! why didn't you tell me
that the only thing worth loving is an actress?"

"Because I have loved so many of them, Dorian."

"Oh, yes, horrid people with dyed hair and painted faces."

"Don't run down dyed hair and painted faces. There is an extraordinary
charm in them, sometimes," said Lord Henry.

"I wish now I had not told you about Sibyl Vane."

"You could not have helped telling me, Dorian. All through your life
you will tell me everything you do."

"Yes, Harry, I believe that is true. I cannot help telling you things.
You have a curious influence over me. If I ever did a crime, I would
come and confess it to you. You would understand me."

"People like you-the wilful sunbeams of life-don't commit crimes,
Dorian. But I am much obliged for the compliment, all the same. And now
tell me-reach me the matches, like a good boy-thanks-what are your
actual relations with Sibyl Vane?"

Dorian Gray leaped to his feet, with flushed cheeks and burning eyes.
"Harry! Sibyl Vane is sacred!"

"It is only the sacred things that are worth touching, Dorian," said
Lord Henry, with a strange touch of pathos in his voice. "But why
should you be annoyed? I suppose she will belong to you some day. When
one is in love, one always begins by deceiving one's self, and one
always ends by deceiving others. That is what the world calls a
romance. You know her, at any rate, I suppose?"

"Of course I know her. On the first night I was at the theatre, the
horrid old Jew came round to the box after the performance was over and
offered to take me behind the scenes and introduce me to her. I was
furious with him, and told him that Juliet had been dead for hundreds
of years and that her body was lying in a marble tomb in Verona. I
think, from his blank look of amazement, that he was under the
impression that I had taken too much champagne, or something."

"I am not surprised."

"Then he asked me if I wrote for any of the newspapers. I told him I
never even read them. He seemed terribly disappointed at that, and
confided to me that all the dramatic critics were in a conspiracy
against him, and that they were every one of them to be bought."

"I should not wonder if he was quite right there. But, on the other
hand, judging from their appearance, most of them cannot be at all
expensive."

"Well, he seemed to think they were beyond his means," laughed Dorian.
"By this time, however, the lights were being put out in the theatre,
and I had to go. He wanted me to try some cigars that he strongly
recommended. I declined. The next night, of course, I arrived at the
place again. When he saw me, he made me a low bow and assured me that I
was a munificent patron of art. He was a most offensive brute, though
he had an extraordinary passion for Shakespeare. He told me once, with
an air of pride, that his five bankruptcies were entirely due to 'The
Bard,' as he insisted on calling him. He seemed to think it a
distinction."

"It was a distinction, my dear Dorian-a great distinction. Most people
become bankrupt through having invested too heavily in the prose of
life. To have ruined one's self over poetry is an honour. But when did
you first speak to Miss Sibyl Vane?"

"The third night. She had been playing Rosalind. I could not help going
round. I had thrown her some flowers, and she had looked at me-at least
I fancied that she had. The old Jew was persistent. He seemed
determined to take me behind, so I consented. It was curious my not
wanting to know her, wasn't it?"

"No; I don't think so."

"My dear Harry, why?"

"I will tell you some other time. Now I want to know about the girl."

"Sibyl? Oh, she was so shy and so gentle. There is something of a child
about her. Her eyes opened wide in exquisite wonder when I told her
what I thought of her performance, and she seemed quite unconscious of
her power. I think we were both rather nervous. The old Jew stood
grinning at the doorway of the dusty greenroom, making elaborate
speeches about us both, while we stood looking at each other like
children. He would insist on calling me 'My Lord,' so I had to assure
Sibyl that I was not anything of the kind. She said quite simply to me,
'You look more like a prince. I must call you Prince Charming.'"

"Upon my word, Dorian, Miss Sibyl knows how to pay compliments."

"You don't understand her, Harry. She regarded me merely as a person in
a play. She knows nothing of life. She lives with her mother, a faded
tired woman who played Lady Capulet in a sort of magenta
dressing-wrapper on the first night, and looks as if she had seen
better days."

"I know that look. It depresses me," murmured Lord Henry, examining his
rings.

"The Jew wanted to tell me her history, but I said it did not interest
me."

"You were quite right. There is always something infinitely mean about
other people's tragedies."

"Sibyl is the only thing I care about. What is it to me where she came
from? From her little head to her little feet, she is absolutely and
entirely divine. Every night of my life I go to see her act, and every
night she is more marvellous."

"That is the reason, I suppose, that you never dine with me now. I
thought you must have some curious romance on hand. You have; but it is
not quite what I expected."

"My dear Harry, we either lunch or sup together every day, and I have
been to the opera with you several times," said Dorian, opening his
blue eyes in wonder.

"You always come dreadfully late."

"Well, I can't help going to see Sibyl play," he cried, "even if it is
only for a single act. I get hungry for her presence; and when I think
of the wonderful soul that is hidden away in that little ivory body, I
am filled with awe."

"You can dine with me to-night, Dorian, can't you?"

He shook his head. "To-night she is Imogen," he answered, "and
to-morrow night she will be Juliet."

"When is she Sibyl Vane?"

"Never."

"I congratulate you."

"How horrid you are! She is all the great heroines of the world in one.
She is more than an individual. You laugh, but I tell you she has
genius. I love her, and I must make her love me. You, who know all the
secrets of life, tell me how to charm Sibyl Vane to love me! I want to
make Romeo jealous. I want the dead lovers of the world to hear our
laughter and grow sad. I want a breath of our passion to stir their
dust into consciousness, to wake their ashes into pain. My God, Harry,
how I worship her!" He was walking up and down the room as he spoke.
Hectic spots of red burned on his cheeks. He was terribly excited.

Lord Henry watched him with a subtle sense of pleasure. How different
he was now from the shy frightened boy he had met in Basil Hallward's
studio! His nature had developed like a flower, had borne blossoms of
scarlet flame. Out of its secret hiding-place had crept his soul, and
desire had come to meet it on the way.

"And what do you propose to do?" said Lord Henry at last.

"I want you and Basil to come with me some night and see her act. I
have not the slightest fear of the result. You are certain to
acknowledge her genius. Then we must get her out of the Jew's hands.
She is bound to him for three years-at least for two years and eight
months-from the present time. I shall have to pay him something, of
course. When all that is settled, I shall take a West End theatre and
bring her out properly. She will make the world as mad as she has made
me."

"That would be impossible, my dear boy."

"Yes, she will. She has not merely art, consummate art-instinct, in
her, but she has personality also; and you have often told me that it
is personalities, not principles, that move the age."

"Well, what night shall we go?"

"Let me see. To-day is Tuesday. Let us fix to-morrow. She plays Juliet
to-morrow."

"All right. The Bristol at eight o'clock; and I will get Basil."

"Not eight, Harry, please. Half-past six. We must be there before the
curtain rises. You must see her in the first act, where she meets
Romeo."

"Half-past six! What an hour! It will be like having a meat-tea, or
reading an English novel. It must be seven. No gentleman dines before
seven. Shall you see Basil between this and then? Or shall I write to
him?"

"Dear Basil! I have not laid eyes on him for a week. It is rather
horrid of me, as he has sent me my portrait in the most wonderful
frame, specially designed by himself, and, though I am a little jealous
of the picture for being a whole month younger than I am, I must admit
that I delight in it. Perhaps you had better write to him. I don't want
to see him alone. He says things that annoy me. He gives me good
advice."

Lord Henry smiled. "People are very fond of giving away what they need
most themselves. It is what I call the depth of generosity."

"Oh, Basil is the best of fellows, but he seems to me to be just a bit
of a Philistine. Since I have known you, Harry, I have discovered
that."

"Basil, my dear boy, puts everything that is charming in him into his
work. The consequence is that he has nothing left for life but his
prejudices, his principles, and his common sense. The only artists I
have ever known who are personally delightful are bad artists. Good
artists exist simply in what they make, and consequently are perfectly
uninteresting in what they are. A great poet, a really great poet, is
the most unpoetical of all creatures. But inferior poets are absolutely
fascinating. The worse their rhymes are, the more picturesque they
look. The mere fact of having published a book of second-rate sonnets
makes a man quite irresistible. He lives the poetry that he cannot
write. The others write the poetry that they dare not realize."

"I wonder is that really so, Harry?" said Dorian Gray, putting some
perfume on his handkerchief out of a large, gold-topped bottle that
stood on the table. "It must be, if you say it. And now I am off.
Imogen is waiting for me. Don't forget about to-morrow. Good-bye."

As he left the room, Lord Henry's heavy eyelids drooped, and he began
to think. Certainly few people had ever interested him so much as
Dorian Gray, and yet the lad's mad adoration of some one else caused
him not the slightest pang of annoyance or jealousy. He was pleased by
it. It made him a more interesting study. He had been always enthralled
by the methods of natural science, but the ordinary subject-matter of
that science had seemed to him trivial and of no import. And so he had
begun by vivisecting himself, as he had ended by vivisecting others.
Human life-that appeared to him the one thing worth investigating.
Compared to it there was nothing else of any value. It was true that as
one watched life in its curious crucible of pain and pleasure, one
could not wear over one's face a mask of glass, nor keep the sulphurous
fumes from troubling the brain and making the imagination turbid with
monstrous fancies and misshapen dreams. There were poisons so subtle
that to know their properties one had to sicken of them. There were
maladies so strange that one had to pass through them if one sought to
understand their nature. And, yet, what a great reward one received!
How wonderful the whole world became to one! To note the curious hard
logic of passion, and the emotional coloured life of the intellect-to
observe where they met, and where they separated, at what point they
were in unison, and at what point they were at discord-there was a
delight in that! What matter what the cost was? One could never pay too
high a price for any sensation.

He was conscious-and the thought brought a gleam of pleasure into his
brown agate eyes-that it was through certain words of his, musical
words said with musical utterance, that Dorian Gray's soul had turned
to this white girl and bowed in worship before her. To a large extent
the lad was his own creation. He had made him premature. That was
something. Ordinary people waited till life disclosed to them its
secrets, but to the few, to the elect, the mysteries of life were
revealed before the veil was drawn away. Sometimes this was the effect
of art, and chiefly of the art of literature, which dealt immediately
with the passions and the intellect. But now and then a complex
personality took the place and assumed the office of art, was indeed,
in its way, a real work of art, life having its elaborate masterpieces,
just as poetry has, or sculpture, or painting.

Yes, the lad was premature. He was gathering his harvest while it was
yet spring. The pulse and passion of youth were in him, but he was
becoming self-conscious. It was delightful to watch him. With his
beautiful face, and his beautiful soul, he was a thing to wonder at. It
was no matter how it all ended, or was destined to end. He was like one
of those gracious figures in a pageant or a play, whose joys seem to be
remote from one, but whose sorrows stir one's sense of beauty, and
whose wounds are like red roses.

Soul and body, body and soul-how mysterious they were! There was
animalism in the soul, and the body had its moments of spirituality.
The senses could refine, and the intellect could degrade. Who could say
where the fleshly impulse ceased, or the psychical impulse began? How
shallow were the arbitrary definitions of ordinary psychologists! And
yet how difficult to decide between the claims of the various schools!
Was the soul a shadow seated in the house of sin? Or was the body
really in the soul, as Giordano Bruno thought? The separation of spirit
from matter was a mystery, and the union of spirit with matter was a
mystery also.

He began to wonder whether we could ever make psychology so absolute a
science that each little spring of life would be revealed to us. As it
was, we always misunderstood ourselves and rarely understood others.
Experience was of no ethical value. It was merely the name men gave to
their mistakes. Moralists had, as a rule, regarded it as a mode of
warning, had claimed for it a certain ethical efficacy in the formation
of character, had praised it as something that taught us what to follow
and showed us what to avoid. But there was no motive power in
experience. It was as little of an active cause as conscience itself.
All that it really demonstrated was that our future would be the same
as our past, and that the sin we had done once, and with loathing, we
would do many times, and with joy.

It was clear to him that the experimental method was the only method by
which one could arrive at any scientific analysis of the passions; and
certainly Dorian Gray was a subject made to his hand, and seemed to
promise rich and fruitful results. His sudden mad love for Sibyl Vane
was a psychological phenomenon of no small interest. There was no doubt
that curiosity had much to do with it, curiosity and the desire for new
experiences, yet it was not a simple, but rather a very complex
passion. What there was in it of the purely sensuous instinct of
boyhood had been transformed by the workings of the imagination,
changed into something that seemed to the lad himself to be remote from
sense, and was for that very reason all the more dangerous. It was the
passions about whose origin we deceived ourselves that tyrannized most
strongly over us. Our weakest motives were those of whose nature we
were conscious. It often happened that when we thought we were
experimenting on others we were really experimenting on ourselves.

While Lord Henry sat dreaming on these things, a knock came to the
door, and his valet entered and reminded him it was time to dress for
dinner. He got up and looked out into the street. The sunset had
smitten into scarlet gold the upper windows of the houses opposite. The
panes glowed like plates of heated metal. The sky above was like a
faded rose. He thought of his friend's young fiery-coloured life and
wondered how it was all going to end.

When he arrived home, about half-past twelve o'clock, he saw a telegram
lying on the hall table. He opened it and found it was from Dorian
Gray. It was to tell him that he was engaged to be married to Sibyl
Vane.




CHAPTER V.


"Mother, Mother, I am so happy!" whispered the girl, burying her face
in the lap of the faded, tired-looking woman who, with back turned to
the shrill intrusive light, was sitting in the one arm-chair that their
dingy sitting-room contained. "I am so happy!" she repeated, "and you
must be happy, too!"

Mrs. Vane winced and put her thin, bismuth-whitened hands on her
daughter's head. "Happy!" she echoed, "I am only happy, Sibyl, when I
see you act. You must not think of anything but your acting. Mr. Isaacs
has been very good to us, and we owe him money."

The girl looked up and pouted. "Money, Mother?" she cried, "what does
money matter? Love is more than money."

"Mr. Isaacs has advanced us fifty pounds to pay off our debts and to
get a proper outfit for James. You must not forget that, Sibyl. Fifty
pounds is a very large sum. Mr. Isaacs has been most considerate."

"He is not a gentleman, Mother, and I hate the way he talks to me,"
said the girl, rising to her feet and going over to the window.

"I don't know how we could manage without him," answered the elder
woman querulously.

Sibyl Vane tossed her head and laughed. "We don't want him any more,
Mother. Prince Charming rules life for us now." Then she paused. A rose
shook in her blood and shadowed her cheeks. Quick breath parted the
petals of her lips. They trembled. Some southern wind of passion swept
over her and stirred the dainty folds of her dress. "I love him," she
said simply.

"Foolish child! foolish child!" was the parrot-phrase flung in answer.
The waving of crooked, false-jewelled fingers gave grotesqueness to the
words.

The girl laughed again. The joy of a caged bird was in her voice. Her
eyes caught the melody and echoed it in radiance, then closed for a
moment, as though to hide their secret. When they opened, the mist of a
dream had passed across them.

Thin-lipped wisdom spoke at her from the worn chair, hinted at
prudence, quoted from that book of cowardice whose author apes the name
of common sense. She did not listen. She was free in her prison of
passion. Her prince, Prince Charming, was with her. She had called on
memory to remake him. She had sent her soul to search for him, and it
had brought him back. His kiss burned again upon her mouth. Her eyelids
were warm with his breath.

Then wisdom altered its method and spoke of espial and discovery. This
young man might be rich. If so, marriage should be thought of. Against
the shell of her ear broke the waves of worldly cunning. The arrows of
craft shot by her. She saw the thin lips moving, and smiled.

Suddenly she felt the need to speak. The wordy silence troubled her.
"Mother, Mother," she cried, "why does he love me so much? I know why I
love him. I love him because he is like what love himself should be.
But what does he see in me? I am not worthy of him. And yet-why, I
cannot tell-though I feel so much beneath him, I don't feel humble. I
feel proud, terribly proud. Mother, did you love my father as I love
Prince Charming?"

The elder woman grew pale beneath the coarse powder that daubed her
cheeks, and her dry lips twitched with a spasm of pain. Sybil rushed to
her, flung her arms round her neck, and kissed her. "Forgive me,
Mother. I know it pains you to talk about our father. But it only pains
you because you loved him so much. Don't look so sad. I am as happy
to-day as you were twenty years ago. Ah! let me be happy for ever!"

"My child, you are far too young to think of falling in love. Besides,
what do you know of this young man? You don't even know his name. The
whole thing is most inconvenient, and really, when James is going away
to Australia, and I have so much to think of, I must say that you
should have shown more consideration. However, as I said before, if he
is rich ..."

"Ah! Mother, Mother, let me be happy!"

Mrs. Vane glanced at her, and with one of those false theatrical
gestures that so often become a mode of second nature to a
stage-player, clasped her in her arms. At this moment, the door opened
and a young lad with rough brown hair came into the room. He was
thick-set of figure, and his hands and feet were large and somewhat
clumsy in movement. He was not so finely bred as his sister. One would
hardly have guessed the close relationship that existed between them.
Mrs. Vane fixed her eyes on him and intensified her smile. She mentally
elevated her son to the dignity of an audience. She felt sure that the
_tableau_ was interesting.

"You might keep some of your kisses for me, Sibyl, I think," said the
lad with a good-natured grumble.

"Ah! but you don't like being kissed, Jim," she cried. "You are a
dreadful old bear." And she ran across the room and hugged him.

James Vane looked into his sister's face with tenderness. "I want you
to come out with me for a walk, Sibyl. I don't suppose I shall ever see
this horrid London again. I am sure I don't want to."

"My son, don't say such dreadful things," murmured Mrs. Vane, taking up
a tawdry theatrical dress, with a sigh, and beginning to patch it. She
felt a little disappointed that he had not joined the group. It would
have increased the theatrical picturesqueness of the situation.

"Why not, Mother? I mean it."

"You pain me, my son. I trust you will return from Australia in a
position of affluence. I believe there is no society of any kind in the
Colonies-nothing that I would call society-so when you have made your
fortune, you must come back and assert yourself in London."

"Society!" muttered the lad. "I don't want to know anything about that.
I should like to make some money to take you and Sibyl off the stage. I
hate it."

"Oh, Jim!" said Sibyl, laughing, "how unkind of you! But are you really
going for a walk with me? That will be nice! I was afraid you were
going to say good-bye to some of your friends-to Tom Hardy, who gave
you that hideous pipe, or Ned Langton, who makes fun of you for smoking
it. It is very sweet of you to let me have your last afternoon. Where
shall we go? Let us go to the park."

"I am too shabby," he answered, frowning. "Only swell people go to the
park."

"Nonsense, Jim," she whispered, stroking the sleeve of his coat.

He hesitated for a moment. "Very well," he said at last, "but don't be
too long dressing." She danced out of the door. One could hear her
singing as she ran upstairs. Her little feet pattered overhead.

He walked up and down the room two or three times. Then he turned to
the still figure in the chair. "Mother, are my things ready?" he asked.

"Quite ready, James," she answered, keeping her eyes on her work. For
some months past she had felt ill at ease when she was alone with this
rough stern son of hers. Her shallow secret nature was troubled when
their eyes met. She used to wonder if he suspected anything. The
silence, for he made no other observation, became intolerable to her.
She began to complain. Women defend themselves by attacking, just as
they attack by sudden and strange surrenders. "I hope you will be
contented, James, with your sea-faring life," she said. "You must
remember that it is your own choice. You might have entered a
solicitor's office. Solicitors are a very respectable class, and in the
country often dine with the best families."

"I hate offices, and I hate clerks," he replied. "But you are quite
right. I have chosen my own life. All I say is, watch over Sibyl. Don't
let her come to any harm. Mother, you must watch over her."

"James, you really talk very strangely. Of course I watch over Sibyl."

"I hear a gentleman comes every night to the theatre and goes behind to
talk to her. Is that right? What about that?"

"You are speaking about things you don't understand, James. In the
profession we are accustomed to receive a great deal of most gratifying
attention. I myself used to receive many bouquets at one time. That was
when acting was really understood. As for Sibyl, I do not know at
present whether her attachment is serious or not. But there is no doubt
that the young man in question is a perfect gentleman. He is always
most polite to me. Besides, he has the appearance of being rich, and
the flowers he sends are lovely."

"You don't know his name, though," said the lad harshly.

"No," answered his mother with a placid expression in her face. "He has
not yet revealed his real name. I think it is quite romantic of him. He
is probably a member of the aristocracy."

James Vane bit his lip. "Watch over Sibyl, Mother," he cried, "watch
over her."

"My son, you distress me very much. Sibyl is always under my special
care. Of course, if this gentleman is wealthy, there is no reason why
she should not contract an alliance with him. I trust he is one of the
aristocracy. He has all the appearance of it, I must say. It might be a
most brilliant marriage for Sibyl. They would make a charming couple.
His good looks are really quite remarkable; everybody notices them."

The lad muttered something to himself and drummed on the window-pane
with his coarse fingers. He had just turned round to say something when
the door opened and Sibyl ran in.

"How serious you both are!" she cried. "What is the matter?"

"Nothing," he answered. "I suppose one must be serious sometimes.
Good-bye, Mother; I will have my dinner at five o'clock. Everything is
packed, except my shirts, so you need not trouble."

"Good-bye, my son," she answered with a bow of strained stateliness.

She was extremely annoyed at the tone he had adopted with her, and
there was something in his look that had made her feel afraid.

"Kiss me, Mother," said the girl. Her flowerlike lips touched the
withered cheek and warmed its frost.

"My child! my child!" cried Mrs. Vane, looking up to the ceiling in
search of an imaginary gallery.

"Come, Sibyl," said her brother impatiently. He hated his mother's
affectations.

They went out into the flickering, wind-blown sunlight and strolled
down the dreary Euston Road. The passersby glanced in wonder at the
sullen heavy youth who, in coarse, ill-fitting clothes, was in the
company of such a graceful, refined-looking girl. He was like a common
gardener walking with a rose.

Jim frowned from time to time when he caught the inquisitive glance of
some stranger. He had that dislike of being stared at, which comes on
geniuses late in life and never leaves the commonplace. Sibyl, however,
was quite unconscious of the effect she was producing. Her love was
trembling in laughter on her lips. She was thinking of Prince Charming,
and, that she might think of him all the more, she did not talk of him,
but prattled on about the ship in which Jim was going to sail, about
the gold he was certain to find, about the wonderful heiress whose life
he was to save from the wicked, red-shirted bushrangers. For he was not
to remain a sailor, or a supercargo, or whatever he was going to be.
Oh, no! A sailor's existence was dreadful. Fancy being cooped up in a
horrid ship, with the hoarse, hump-backed waves trying to get in, and a
black wind blowing the masts down and tearing the sails into long
screaming ribands! He was to leave the vessel at Melbourne, bid a
polite good-bye to the captain, and go off at once to the gold-fields.
Before a week was over he was to come across a large nugget of pure
gold, the largest nugget that had ever been discovered, and bring it
down to the coast in a waggon guarded by six mounted policemen. The
bushrangers were to attack them three times, and be defeated with
immense slaughter. Or, no. He was not to go to the gold-fields at all.
They were horrid places, where men got intoxicated, and shot each other
in bar-rooms, and used bad language. He was to be a nice sheep-farmer,
and one evening, as he was riding home, he was to see the beautiful
heiress being carried off by a robber on a black horse, and give chase,
and rescue her. Of course, she would fall in love with him, and he with
her, and they would get married, and come home, and live in an immense
house in London. Yes, there were delightful things in store for him.
But he must be very good, and not lose his temper, or spend his money
foolishly. She was only a year older than he was, but she knew so much
more of life. He must be sure, also, to write to her by every mail, and
to say his prayers each night before he went to sleep. God was very
good, and would watch over him. She would pray for him, too, and in a
few years he would come back quite rich and happy.

The lad listened sulkily to her and made no answer. He was heart-sick
at leaving home.

Yet it was not this alone that made him gloomy and morose.
Inexperienced though he was, he had still a strong sense of the danger
of Sibyl's position. This young dandy who was making love to her could
mean her no good. He was a gentleman, and he hated him for that, hated
him through some curious race-instinct for which he could not account,
and which for that reason was all the more dominant within him. He was
conscious also of the shallowness and vanity of his mother's nature,
and in that saw infinite peril for Sibyl and Sibyl's happiness.
Children begin by loving their parents; as they grow older they judge
them; sometimes they forgive them.

His mother! He had something on his mind to ask of her, something that
he had brooded on for many months of silence. A chance phrase that he
had heard at the theatre, a whispered sneer that had reached his ears
one night as he waited at the stage-door, had set loose a train of
horrible thoughts. He remembered it as if it had been the lash of a
hunting-crop across his face. His brows knit together into a wedge-like
furrow, and with a twitch of pain he bit his underlip.

"You are not listening to a word I am saying, Jim," cried Sibyl, "and I
am making the most delightful plans for your future. Do say something."

"What do you want me to say?"

"Oh! that you will be a good boy and not forget us," she answered,
smiling at him.

He shrugged his shoulders. "You are more likely to forget me than I am
to forget you, Sibyl."

She flushed. "What do you mean, Jim?" she asked.

"You have a new friend, I hear. Who is he? Why have you not told me
about him? He means you no good."

"Stop, Jim!" she exclaimed. "You must not say anything against him. I
love him."

"Why, you don't even know his name," answered the lad. "Who is he? I
have a right to know."

"He is called Prince Charming. Don't you like the name. Oh! you silly
boy! you should never forget it. If you only saw him, you would think
him the most wonderful person in the world. Some day you will meet
him-when you come back from Australia. You will like him so much.
Everybody likes him, and I ... love him. I wish you could come to the
theatre to-night. He is going to be there, and I am to play Juliet. Oh!
how I shall play it! Fancy, Jim, to be in love and play Juliet! To have
him sitting there! To play for his delight! I am afraid I may frighten
the company, frighten or enthrall them. To be in love is to surpass
one's self. Poor dreadful Mr. Isaacs will be shouting 'genius' to his
loafers at the bar. He has preached me as a dogma; to-night he will
announce me as a revelation. I feel it. And it is all his, his only,
Prince Charming, my wonderful lover, my god of graces. But I am poor
beside him. Poor? What does that matter? When poverty creeps in at the
door, love flies in through the window. Our proverbs want rewriting.
They were made in winter, and it is summer now; spring-time for me, I
think, a very dance of blossoms in blue skies."

"He is a gentleman," said the lad sullenly.

"A prince!" she cried musically. "What more do you want?"

"He wants to enslave you."

"I shudder at the thought of being free."

"I want you to beware of him."

"To see him is to worship him; to know him is to trust him."

"Sibyl, you are mad about him."

She laughed and took his arm. "You dear old Jim, you talk as if you
were a hundred. Some day you will be in love yourself. Then you will
know what it is. Don't look so sulky. Surely you should be glad to
think that, though you are going away, you leave me happier than I have
ever been before. Life has been hard for us both, terribly hard and
difficult. But it will be different now. You are going to a new world,
and I have found one. Here are two chairs; let us sit down and see the
smart people go by."

They took their seats amidst a crowd of watchers. The tulip-beds across
the road flamed like throbbing rings of fire. A white dust-tremulous
cloud of orris-root it seemed-hung in the panting air. The brightly
coloured parasols danced and dipped like monstrous butterflies.

She made her brother talk of himself, his hopes, his prospects. He
spoke slowly and with effort. They passed words to each other as
players at a game pass counters. Sibyl felt oppressed. She could not
communicate her joy. A faint smile curving that sullen mouth was all
the echo she could win. After some time she became silent. Suddenly she
caught a glimpse of golden hair and laughing lips, and in an open
carriage with two ladies Dorian Gray drove past.

She started to her feet. "There he is!" she cried.

"Who?" said Jim Vane.

"Prince Charming," she answered, looking after the victoria.

He jumped up and seized her roughly by the arm. "Show him to me. Which
is he? Point him out. I must see him!" he exclaimed; but at that moment
the Duke of Berwick's four-in-hand came between, and when it had left
the space clear, the carriage had swept out of the park.

"He is gone," murmured Sibyl sadly. "I wish you had seen him."

"I wish I had, for as sure as there is a God in heaven, if he ever does
you any wrong, I shall kill him."

She looked at him in horror. He repeated his words. They cut the air
like a dagger. The people round began to gape. A lady standing close to
her tittered.

"Come away, Jim; come away," she whispered. He followed her doggedly as
she passed through the crowd. He felt glad at what he had said.

When they reached the Achilles Statue, she turned round. There was pity
in her eyes that became laughter on her lips. She shook her head at
him. "You are foolish, Jim, utterly foolish; a bad-tempered boy, that
is all. How can you say such horrible things? You don't know what you
are talking about. You are simply jealous and unkind. Ah! I wish you
would fall in love. Love makes people good, and what you said was
wicked."

"I am sixteen," he answered, "and I know what I am about. Mother is no
help to you. She doesn't understand how to look after you. I wish now
that I was not going to Australia at all. I have a great mind to chuck
the whole thing up. I would, if my articles hadn't been signed."

"Oh, don't be so serious, Jim. You are like one of the heroes of those
silly melodramas Mother used to be so fond of acting in. I am not going
to quarrel with you. I have seen him, and oh! to see him is perfect
happiness. We won't quarrel. I know you would never harm any one I
love, would you?"

"Not as long as you love him, I suppose," was the sullen answer.

"I shall love him for ever!" she cried.

"And he?"

"For ever, too!"

"He had better."

She shrank from him. Then she laughed and put her hand on his arm. He
was merely a boy.

At the Marble Arch they hailed an omnibus, which left them close to
their shabby home in the Euston Road. It was after five o'clock, and
Sibyl had to lie down for a couple of hours before acting. Jim insisted
that she should do so. He said that he would sooner part with her when
their mother was not present. She would be sure to make a scene, and he
detested scenes of every kind.

In Sybil's own room they parted. There was jealousy in the lad's heart,
and a fierce murderous hatred of the stranger who, as it seemed to him,
had come between them. Yet, when her arms were flung round his neck,
and her fingers strayed through his hair, he softened and kissed her
with real affection. There were tears in his eyes as he went
downstairs.

His mother was waiting for him below. She grumbled at his
unpunctuality, as he entered. He made no answer, but sat down to his
meagre meal. The flies buzzed round the table and crawled over the
stained cloth. Through the rumble of omnibuses, and the clatter of
street-cabs, he could hear the droning voice devouring each minute that
was left to him.

After some time, he thrust away his plate and put his head in his
hands. He felt that he had a right to know. It should have been told to
him before, if it was as he suspected. Leaden with fear, his mother
watched him. Words dropped mechanically from her lips. A tattered lace
handkerchief twitched in her fingers. When the clock struck six, he got
up and went to the door. Then he turned back and looked at her. Their
eyes met. In hers he saw a wild appeal for mercy. It enraged him.

"Mother, I have something to ask you," he said. Her eyes wandered
vaguely about the room. She made no answer. "Tell me the truth. I have
a right to know. Were you married to my father?"

She heaved a deep sigh. It was a sigh of relief. The terrible moment,
the moment that night and day, for weeks and months, she had dreaded,
had come at last, and yet she felt no terror. Indeed, in some measure
it was a disappointment to her. The vulgar directness of the question
called for a direct answer. The situation had not been gradually led up
to. It was crude. It reminded her of a bad rehearsal.

"No," she answered, wondering at the harsh simplicity of life.

"My father was a scoundrel then!" cried the lad, clenching his fists.

She shook her head. "I knew he was not free. We loved each other very
much. If he had lived, he would have made provision for us. Don't speak
against him, my son. He was your father, and a gentleman. Indeed, he
was highly connected."

An oath broke from his lips. "I don't care for myself," he exclaimed,
"but don't let Sibyl.... It is a gentleman, isn't it, who is in love
with her, or says he is? Highly connected, too, I suppose."

For a moment a hideous sense of humiliation came over the woman. Her
head drooped. She wiped her eyes with shaking hands. "Sibyl has a
mother," she murmured; "I had none."

The lad was touched. He went towards her, and stooping down, he kissed
her. "I am sorry if I have pained you by asking about my father," he
said, "but I could not help it. I must go now. Good-bye. Don't forget
that you will have only one child now to look after, and believe me
that if this man wrongs my sister, I will find out who he is, track him
down, and kill him like a dog. I swear it."

The exaggerated folly of the threat, the passionate gesture that
accompanied it, the mad melodramatic words, made life seem more vivid
to her. She was familiar with the atmosphere. She breathed more freely,
and for the first time for many months she really admired her son. She
would have liked to have continued the scene on the same emotional
scale, but he cut her short. Trunks had to be carried down and mufflers
looked for. The lodging-house drudge bustled in and out. There was the
bargaining with the cabman. The moment was lost in vulgar details. It
was with a renewed feeling of disappointment that she waved the
tattered lace handkerchief from the window, as her son drove away. She
was conscious that a great opportunity had been wasted. She consoled
herself by telling Sibyl how desolate she felt her life would be, now
that she had only one child to look after. She remembered the phrase.
It had pleased her. Of the threat she said nothing. It was vividly and
dramatically expressed. She felt that they would all laugh at it some
day.




CHAPTER VI.


"I suppose you have heard the news, Basil?" said Lord Henry that
evening as Hallward was shown into a little private room at the Bristol
where dinner had been laid for three.

"No, Harry," answered the artist, giving his hat and coat to the bowing
waiter. "What is it? Nothing about politics, I hope! They don't
interest me. There is hardly a single person in the House of Commons
worth painting, though many of them would be the better for a little
whitewashing."

"Dorian Gray is engaged to be married," said Lord Henry, watching him
as he spoke.

Hallward started and then frowned. "Dorian engaged to be married!" he
cried. "Impossible!"

"It is perfectly true."

"To whom?"

"To some little actress or other."

"I can't believe it. Dorian is far too sensible."

"Dorian is far too wise not to do foolish things now and then, my dear
Basil."

"Marriage is hardly a thing that one can do now and then, Harry."

"Except in America," rejoined Lord Henry languidly. "But I didn't say
he was married. I said he was engaged to be married. There is a great
difference. I have a distinct remembrance of being married, but I have
no recollection at all of being engaged. I am inclined to think that I
never was engaged."

"But think of Dorian's birth, and position, and wealth. It would be
absurd for him to marry so much beneath him."

"If you want to make him marry this girl, tell him that, Basil. He is
sure to do it, then. Whenever a man does a thoroughly stupid thing, it
is always from the noblest motives."

"I hope the girl is good, Harry. I don't want to see Dorian tied to
some vile creature, who might degrade his nature and ruin his
intellect."

"Oh, she is better than good-she is beautiful," murmured Lord Henry,
sipping a glass of vermouth and orange-bitters. "Dorian says she is
beautiful, and he is not often wrong about things of that kind. Your
portrait of him has quickened his appreciation of the personal
appearance of other people. It has had that excellent effect, amongst
others. We are to see her to-night, if that boy doesn't forget his
appointment."

"Are you serious?"

"Quite serious, Basil. I should be miserable if I thought I should ever
be more serious than I am at the present moment."

"But do you approve of it, Harry?" asked the painter, walking up and
down the room and biting his lip. "You can't approve of it, possibly.
It is some silly infatuation."

"I never approve, or disapprove, of anything now. It is an absurd
attitude to take towards life. We are not sent into the world to air
our moral prejudices. I never take any notice of what common people
say, and I never interfere with what charming people do. If a
personality fascinates me, whatever mode of expression that personality
selects is absolutely delightful to me. Dorian Gray falls in love with
a beautiful girl who acts Juliet, and proposes to marry her. Why not?
If he wedded Messalina, he would be none the less interesting. You know
I am not a champion of marriage. The real drawback to marriage is that
it makes one unselfish. And unselfish people are colourless. They lack
individuality. Still, there are certain temperaments that marriage
makes more complex. They retain their egotism, and add to it many other
egos. They are forced to have more than one life. They become more
highly organized, and to be highly organized is, I should fancy, the
object of man's existence. Besides, every experience is of value, and
whatever one may say against marriage, it is certainly an experience. I
hope that Dorian Gray will make this girl his wife, passionately adore
her for six months, and then suddenly become fascinated by some one
else. He would be a wonderful study."

"You don't mean a single word of all that, Harry; you know you don't.
If Dorian Gray's life were spoiled, no one would be sorrier than
yourself. You are much better than you pretend to be."

Lord Henry laughed. "The reason we all like to think so well of others
is that we are all afraid for ourselves. The basis of optimism is sheer
terror. We think that we are generous because we credit our neighbour
with the possession of those virtues that are likely to be a benefit to
us. We praise the banker that we may overdraw our account, and find
good qualities in the highwayman in the hope that he may spare our
pockets. I mean everything that I have said. I have the greatest
contempt for optimism. As for a spoiled life, no life is spoiled but
one whose growth is arrested. If you want to mar a nature, you have
merely to reform it. As for marriage, of course that would be silly,
but there are other and more interesting bonds between men and women. I
will certainly encourage them. They have the charm of being
fashionable. But here is Dorian himself. He will tell you more than I
can."

"My dear Harry, my dear Basil, you must both congratulate me!" said the
lad, throwing off his evening cape with its satin-lined wings and
shaking each of his friends by the hand in turn. "I have never been so
happy. Of course, it is sudden-all really delightful things are. And
yet it seems to me to be the one thing I have been looking for all my
life." He was flushed with excitement and pleasure, and looked
extraordinarily handsome.

"I hope you will always be very happy, Dorian," said Hallward, "but I
don't quite forgive you for not having let me know of your engagement.
You let Harry know."

"And I don't forgive you for being late for dinner," broke in Lord
Henry, putting his hand on the lad's shoulder and smiling as he spoke.
"Come, let us sit down and try what the new _chef_ here is like, and
then you will tell us how it all came about."

"There is really not much to tell," cried Dorian as they took their
seats at the small round table. "What happened was simply this. After I
left you yesterday evening, Harry, I dressed, had some dinner at that
little Italian restaurant in Rupert Street you introduced me to, and
went down at eight o'clock to the theatre. Sibyl was playing Rosalind.
Of course, the scenery was dreadful and the Orlando absurd. But Sibyl!
You should have seen her! When she came on in her boy's clothes, she
was perfectly wonderful. She wore a moss-coloured velvet jerkin with
cinnamon sleeves, slim, brown, cross-gartered hose, a dainty little
green cap with a hawk's feather caught in a jewel, and a hooded cloak
lined with dull red. She had never seemed to me more exquisite. She had
all the delicate grace of that Tanagra figurine that you have in your
studio, Basil. Her hair clustered round her face like dark leaves round
a pale rose. As for her acting-well, you shall see her to-night. She is
simply a born artist. I sat in the dingy box absolutely enthralled. I
forgot that I was in London and in the nineteenth century. I was away
with my love in a forest that no man had ever seen. After the
performance was over, I went behind and spoke to her. As we were
sitting together, suddenly there came into her eyes a look that I had
never seen there before. My lips moved towards hers. We kissed each
other. I can't describe to you what I felt at that moment. It seemed to
me that all my life had been narrowed to one perfect point of
rose-coloured joy. She trembled all over and shook like a white
narcissus. Then she flung herself on her knees and kissed my hands. I
feel that I should not tell you all this, but I can't help it. Of
course, our engagement is a dead secret. She has not even told her own
mother. I don't know what my guardians will say. Lord Radley is sure to
be furious. I don't care. I shall be of age in less than a year, and
then I can do what I like. I have been right, Basil, haven't I, to take
my love out of poetry and to find my wife in Shakespeare's plays? Lips
that Shakespeare taught to speak have whispered their secret in my ear.
I have had the arms of Rosalind around me, and kissed Juliet on the
mouth."

"Yes, Dorian, I suppose you were right," said Hallward slowly.

"Have you seen her to-day?" asked Lord Henry.

Dorian Gray shook his head. "I left her in the forest of Arden; I shall
find her in an orchard in Verona."

Lord Henry sipped his champagne in a meditative manner. "At what
particular point did you mention the word marriage, Dorian? And what
did she say in answer? Perhaps you forgot all about it."

"My dear Harry, I did not treat it as a business transaction, and I did
not make any formal proposal. I told her that I loved her, and she said
she was not worthy to be my wife. Not worthy! Why, the whole world is
nothing to me compared with her."

"Women are wonderfully practical," murmured Lord Henry, "much more
practical than we are. In situations of that kind we often forget to
say anything about marriage, and they always remind us."

Hallward laid his hand upon his arm. "Don't, Harry. You have annoyed
Dorian. He is not like other men. He would never bring misery upon any
one. His nature is too fine for that."

Lord Henry looked across the table. "Dorian is never annoyed with me,"
he answered. "I asked the question for the best reason possible, for
the only reason, indeed, that excuses one for asking any
question-simple curiosity. I have a theory that it is always the women
who propose to us, and not we who propose to the women. Except, of
course, in middle-class life. But then the middle classes are not
modern."

Dorian Gray laughed, and tossed his head. "You are quite incorrigible,
Harry; but I don't mind. It is impossible to be angry with you. When
you see Sibyl Vane, you will feel that the man who could wrong her
would be a beast, a beast without a heart. I cannot understand how any
one can wish to shame the thing he loves. I love Sibyl Vane. I want to
place her on a pedestal of gold and to see the world worship the woman
who is mine. What is marriage? An irrevocable vow. You mock at it for
that. Ah! don't mock. It is an irrevocable vow that I want to take. Her
trust makes me faithful, her belief makes me good. When I am with her,
I regret all that you have taught me. I become different from what you
have known me to be. I am changed, and the mere touch of Sibyl Vane's
hand makes me forget you and all your wrong, fascinating, poisonous,
delightful theories."

"And those are ...?" asked Lord Henry, helping himself to some salad.

"Oh, your theories about life, your theories about love, your theories
about pleasure. All your theories, in fact, Harry."

"Pleasure is the only thing worth having a theory about," he answered
in his slow melodious voice. "But I am afraid I cannot claim my theory
as my own. It belongs to Nature, not to me. Pleasure is Nature's test,
her sign of approval. When we are happy, we are always good, but when
we are good, we are not always happy."

"Ah! but what do you mean by good?" cried Basil Hallward.

"Yes," echoed Dorian, leaning back in his chair and looking at Lord
Henry over the heavy clusters of purple-lipped irises that stood in the
centre of the table, "what do you mean by good, Harry?"

"To be good is to be in harmony with one's self," he replied, touching
the thin stem of his glass with his pale, fine-pointed fingers.
"Discord is to be forced to be in harmony with others. One's own
life-that is the important thing. As for the lives of one's neighbours,
if one wishes to be a prig or a Puritan, one can flaunt one's moral
views about them, but they are not one's concern. Besides,
individualism has really the higher aim. Modern morality consists in
accepting the standard of one's age. I consider that for any man of
culture to accept the standard of his age is a form of the grossest
immorality."

"But, surely, if one lives merely for one's self, Harry, one pays a
terrible price for doing so?" suggested the painter.

"Yes, we are overcharged for everything nowadays. I should fancy that
the real tragedy of the poor is that they can afford nothing but
self-denial. Beautiful sins, like beautiful things, are the privilege
of the rich."

"One has to pay in other ways but money."

"What sort of ways, Basil?"

"Oh! I should fancy in remorse, in suffering, in ... well, in the
consciousness of degradation."

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. "My dear fellow, mediaeval art is
charming, but mediaeval emotions are out of date. One can use them in
fiction, of course. But then the only things that one can use in
fiction are the things that one has ceased to use in fact. Believe me,
no civilized man ever regrets a pleasure, and no uncivilized man ever
knows what a pleasure is."

"I know what pleasure is," cried Dorian Gray. "It is to adore some
one."

"That is certainly better than being adored," he answered, toying with
some fruits. "Being adored is a nuisance. Women treat us just as
humanity treats its gods. They worship us, and are always bothering us
to do something for them."

"I should have said that whatever they ask for they had first given to
us," murmured the lad gravely. "They create love in our natures. They
have a right to demand it back."

"That is quite true, Dorian," cried Hallward.

"Nothing is ever quite true," said Lord Henry.

"This is," interrupted Dorian. "You must admit, Harry, that women give
to men the very gold of their lives."

"Possibly," he sighed, "but they invariably want it back in such very
small change. That is the worry. Women, as some witty Frenchman once
put it, inspire us with the desire to do masterpieces and always
prevent us from carrying them out."

"Harry, you are dreadful! I don't know why I like you so much."

"You will always like me, Dorian," he replied. "Will you have some
coffee, you fellows? Waiter, bring coffee, and _fine-champagne_, and
some cigarettes. No, don't mind the cigarettes-I have some. Basil, I
can't allow you to smoke cigars. You must have a cigarette. A cigarette
is the perfect type of a perfect pleasure. It is exquisite, and it
leaves one unsatisfied. What more can one want? Yes, Dorian, you will
always be fond of me. I represent to you all the sins you have never
had the courage to commit."

"What nonsense you talk, Harry!" cried the lad, taking a light from a
fire-breathing silver dragon that the waiter had placed on the table.
"Let us go down to the theatre. When Sibyl comes on the stage you will
have a new ideal of life. She will represent something to you that you
have never known."

"I have known everything," said Lord Henry, with a tired look in his
eyes, "but I am always ready for a new emotion. I am afraid, however,
that, for me at any rate, there is no such thing. Still, your wonderful
girl may thrill me. I love acting. It is so much more real than life.
Let us go. Dorian, you will come with me. I am so sorry, Basil, but
there is only room for two in the brougham. You must follow us in a
hansom."

They got up and put on their coats, sipping their coffee standing. The
painter was silent and preoccupied. There was a gloom over him. He
could not bear this marriage, and yet it seemed to him to be better
than many other things that might have happened. After a few minutes,
they all passed downstairs. He drove off by himself, as had been
arranged, and watched the flashing lights of the little brougham in
front of him. A strange sense of loss came over him. He felt that
Dorian Gray would never again be to him all that he had been in the
past. Life had come between them.... His eyes darkened, and the crowded
flaring streets became blurred to his eyes. When the cab drew up at the
theatre, it seemed to him that he had grown years older.




CHAPTER VII.


For some reason or other, the house was crowded that night, and the fat
Jew manager who met them at the door was beaming from ear to ear with
an oily tremulous smile. He escorted them to their box with a sort of
pompous humility, waving his fat jewelled hands and talking at the top
of his voice. Dorian Gray loathed him more than ever. He felt as if he
had come to look for Miranda and had been met by Caliban. Lord Henry,
upon the other hand, rather liked him. At least he declared he did, and
insisted on shaking him by the hand and assuring him that he was proud
to meet a man who had discovered a real genius and gone bankrupt over a
poet. Hallward amused himself with watching the faces in the pit. The
heat was terribly oppressive, and the huge sunlight flamed like a
monstrous dahlia with petals of yellow fire. The youths in the gallery
had taken off their coats and waistcoats and hung them over the side.
They talked to each other across the theatre and shared their oranges
with the tawdry girls who sat beside them. Some women were laughing in
the pit. Their voices were horribly shrill and discordant. The sound of
the popping of corks came from the bar.

"What a place to find one's divinity in!" said Lord Henry.

"Yes!" answered Dorian Gray. "It was here I found her, and she is
divine beyond all living things. When she acts, you will forget
everything. These common rough people, with their coarse faces and
brutal gestures, become quite different when she is on the stage. They
sit silently and watch her. They weep and laugh as she wills them to
do. She makes them as responsive as a violin. She spiritualizes them,
and one feels that they are of the same flesh and blood as one's self."

"The same flesh and blood as one's self! Oh, I hope not!" exclaimed
Lord Henry, who was scanning the occupants of the gallery through his
opera-glass.

"Don't pay any attention to him, Dorian," said the painter. "I
understand what you mean, and I believe in this girl. Any one you love
must be marvellous, and any girl who has the effect you describe must
be fine and noble. To spiritualize one's age-that is something worth
doing. If this girl can give a soul to those who have lived without
one, if she can create the sense of beauty in people whose lives have
been sordid and ugly, if she can strip them of their selfishness and
lend them tears for sorrows that are not their own, she is worthy of
all your adoration, worthy of the adoration of the world. This marriage
is quite right. I did not think so at first, but I admit it now. The
gods made Sibyl Vane for you. Without her you would have been
incomplete."

"Thanks, Basil," answered Dorian Gray, pressing his hand. "I knew that
you would understand me. Harry is so cynical, he terrifies me. But here
is the orchestra. It is quite dreadful, but it only lasts for about
five minutes. Then the curtain rises, and you will see the girl to whom
I am going to give all my life, to whom I have given everything that is
good in me."

A quarter of an hour afterwards, amidst an extraordinary turmoil of
applause, Sibyl Vane stepped on to the stage. Yes, she was certainly
lovely to look at-one of the loveliest creatures, Lord Henry thought,
that he had ever seen. There was something of the fawn in her shy grace
and startled eyes. A faint blush, like the shadow of a rose in a mirror
of silver, came to her cheeks as she glanced at the crowded
enthusiastic house. She stepped back a few paces and her lips seemed to
tremble. Basil Hallward leaped to his feet and began to applaud.
Motionless, and as one in a dream, sat Dorian Gray, gazing at her. Lord
Henry peered through his glasses, murmuring, "Charming! charming!"

The scene was the hall of Capulet's house, and Romeo in his pilgrim's
dress had entered with Mercutio and his other friends. The band, such
as it was, struck up a few bars of music, and the dance began. Through
the crowd of ungainly, shabbily dressed actors, Sibyl Vane moved like a
creature from a finer world. Her body swayed, while she danced, as a
plant sways in the water. The curves of her throat were the curves of a
white lily. Her hands seemed to be made of cool ivory.

Yet she was curiously listless. She showed no sign of joy when her eyes
rested on Romeo. The few words she had to speak-

Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
    Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
    And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss-


with the brief dialogue that follows, were spoken in a thoroughly
artificial manner. The voice was exquisite, but from the point of view
of tone it was absolutely false. It was wrong in colour. It took away
all the life from the verse. It made the passion unreal.

Dorian Gray grew pale as he watched her. He was puzzled and anxious.
Neither of his friends dared to say anything to him. She seemed to them
to be absolutely incompetent. They were horribly disappointed.

Yet they felt that the true test of any Juliet is the balcony scene of
the second act. They waited for that. If she failed there, there was
nothing in her.

She looked charming as she came out in the moonlight. That could not be
denied. But the staginess of her acting was unbearable, and grew worse
as she went on. Her gestures became absurdly artificial. She
overemphasized everything that she had to say. The beautiful passage-

Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night-


was declaimed with the painful precision of a schoolgirl who has been
taught to recite by some second-rate professor of elocution. When she
leaned over the balcony and came to those wonderful lines-

Although I joy in thee,
I have no joy of this contract to-night:
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can say, "It lightens." Sweet, good-night!
This bud of love by summer's ripening breath
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet-


she spoke the words as though they conveyed no meaning to her. It was
not nervousness. Indeed, so far from being nervous, she was absolutely
self-contained. It was simply bad art. She was a complete failure.

Even the common uneducated audience of the pit and gallery lost their
interest in the play. They got restless, and began to talk loudly and
to whistle. The Jew manager, who was standing at the back of the
dress-circle, stamped and swore with rage. The only person unmoved was
the girl herself.

When the second act was over, there came a storm of hisses, and Lord
Henry got up from his chair and put on his coat. "She is quite
beautiful, Dorian," he said, "but she can't act. Let us go."

"I am going to see the play through," answered the lad, in a hard
bitter voice. "I am awfully sorry that I have made you waste an
evening, Harry. I apologize to you both."

"My dear Dorian, I should think Miss Vane was ill," interrupted
Hallward. "We will come some other night."

"I wish she were ill," he rejoined. "But she seems to me to be simply
callous and cold. She has entirely altered. Last night she was a great
artist. This evening she is merely a commonplace mediocre actress."

"Don't talk like that about any one you love, Dorian. Love is a more
wonderful thing than art."

"They are both simply forms of imitation," remarked Lord Henry. "But do
let us go. Dorian, you must not stay here any longer. It is not good
for one's morals to see bad acting. Besides, I don't suppose you will
want your wife to act, so what does it matter if she plays Juliet like
a wooden doll? She is very lovely, and if she knows as little about
life as she does about acting, she will be a delightful experience.
There are only two kinds of people who are really fascinating-people
who know absolutely everything, and people who know absolutely nothing.
Good heavens, my dear boy, don't look so tragic! The secret of
remaining young is never to have an emotion that is unbecoming. Come to
the club with Basil and myself. We will smoke cigarettes and drink to
the beauty of Sibyl Vane. She is beautiful. What more can you want?"

"Go away, Harry," cried the lad. "I want to be alone. Basil, you must
go. Ah! can't you see that my heart is breaking?" The hot tears came to
his eyes. His lips trembled, and rushing to the back of the box, he
leaned up against the wall, hiding his face in his hands.

"Let us go, Basil," said Lord Henry with a strange tenderness in his
voice, and the two young men passed out together.

A few moments afterwards the footlights flared up and the curtain rose
on the third act. Dorian Gray went back to his seat. He looked pale,
and proud, and indifferent. The play dragged on, and seemed
interminable. Half of the audience went out, tramping in heavy boots
and laughing. The whole thing was a _fiasco_. The last act was played
to almost empty benches. The curtain went down on a titter and some
groans.

As soon as it was over, Dorian Gray rushed behind the scenes into the
greenroom. The girl was standing there alone, with a look of triumph on
her face. Her eyes were lit with an exquisite fire. There was a
radiance about her. Her parted lips were smiling over some secret of
their own.

When he entered, she looked at him, and an expression of infinite joy
came over her. "How badly I acted to-night, Dorian!" she cried.

"Horribly!" he answered, gazing at her in amazement. "Horribly! It was
dreadful. Are you ill? You have no idea what it was. You have no idea
what I suffered."

The girl smiled. "Dorian," she answered, lingering over his name with
long-drawn music in her voice, as though it were sweeter than honey to
the red petals of her mouth. "Dorian, you should have understood. But
you understand now, don't you?"

"Understand what?" he asked, angrily.

"Why I was so bad to-night. Why I shall always be bad. Why I shall
never act well again."

He shrugged his shoulders. "You are ill, I suppose. When you are ill
you shouldn't act. You make yourself ridiculous. My friends were bored.
I was bored."

She seemed not to listen to him. She was transfigured with joy. An
ecstasy of happiness dominated her.

"Dorian, Dorian," she cried, "before I knew you, acting was the one
reality of my life. It was only in the theatre that I lived. I thought
that it was all true. I was Rosalind one night and Portia the other.
The joy of Beatrice was my joy, and the sorrows of Cordelia were mine
also. I believed in everything. The common people who acted with me
seemed to me to be godlike. The painted scenes were my world. I knew
nothing but shadows, and I thought them real. You came-oh, my beautiful
love!-and you freed my soul from prison. You taught me what reality
really is. To-night, for the first time in my life, I saw through the
hollowness, the sham, the silliness of the empty pageant in which I had
always played. To-night, for the first time, I became conscious that
the Romeo was hideous, and old, and painted, that the moonlight in the
orchard was false, that the scenery was vulgar, and that the words I
had to speak were unreal, were not my words, were not what I wanted to
say. You had brought me something higher, something of which all art is
but a reflection. You had made me understand what love really is. My
love! My love! Prince Charming! Prince of life! I have grown sick of
shadows. You are more to me than all art can ever be. What have I to do
with the puppets of a play? When I came on to-night, I could not
understand how it was that everything had gone from me. I thought that
I was going to be wonderful. I found that I could do nothing. Suddenly
it dawned on my soul what it all meant. The knowledge was exquisite to
me. I heard them hissing, and I smiled. What could they know of love
such as ours? Take me away, Dorian-take me away with you, where we can
be quite alone. I hate the stage. I might mimic a passion that I do not
feel, but I cannot mimic one that burns me like fire. Oh, Dorian,
Dorian, you understand now what it signifies? Even if I could do it, it
would be profanation for me to play at being in love. You have made me
see that."

He flung himself down on the sofa and turned away his face. "You have
killed my love," he muttered.

She looked at him in wonder and laughed. He made no answer. She came
across to him, and with her little fingers stroked his hair. She knelt
down and pressed his hands to her lips. He drew them away, and a
shudder ran through him.

Then he leaped up and went to the door. "Yes," he cried, "you have
killed my love. You used to stir my imagination. Now you don't even
stir my curiosity. You simply produce no effect. I loved you because
you were marvellous, because you had genius and intellect, because you
realized the dreams of great poets and gave shape and substance to the
shadows of art. You have thrown it all away. You are shallow and
stupid. My God! how mad I was to love you! What a fool I have been! You
are nothing to me now. I will never see you again. I will never think
of you. I will never mention your name. You don't know what you were to
me, once. Why, once ... Oh, I can't bear to think of it! I wish I had
never laid eyes upon you! You have spoiled the romance of my life. How
little you can know of love, if you say it mars your art! Without your
art, you are nothing. I would have made you famous, splendid,
magnificent. The world would have worshipped you, and you would have
borne my name. What are you now? A third-rate actress with a pretty
face."

The girl grew white, and trembled. She clenched her hands together, and
her voice seemed to catch in her throat. "You are not serious, Dorian?"
she murmured. "You are acting."

"Acting! I leave that to you. You do it so well," he answered bitterly.

She rose from her knees and, with a piteous expression of pain in her
face, came across the room to him. She put her hand upon his arm and
looked into his eyes. He thrust her back. "Don't touch me!" he cried.

A low moan broke from her, and she flung herself at his feet and lay
there like a trampled flower. "Dorian, Dorian, don't leave me!" she
whispered. "I am so sorry I didn't act well. I was thinking of you all
the time. But I will try-indeed, I will try. It came so suddenly across
me, my love for you. I think I should never have known it if you had
not kissed me-if we had not kissed each other. Kiss me again, my love.
Don't go away from me. I couldn't bear it. Oh! don't go away from me.
My brother ... No; never mind. He didn't mean it. He was in jest....
But you, oh! can't you forgive me for to-night? I will work so hard and
try to improve. Don't be cruel to me, because I love you better than
anything in the world. After all, it is only once that I have not
pleased you. But you are quite right, Dorian. I should have shown
myself more of an artist. It was foolish of me, and yet I couldn't help
it. Oh, don't leave me, don't leave me." A fit of passionate sobbing
choked her. She crouched on the floor like a wounded thing, and Dorian
Gray, with his beautiful eyes, looked down at her, and his chiselled
lips curled in exquisite disdain. There is always something ridiculous
about the emotions of people whom one has ceased to love. Sibyl Vane
seemed to him to be absurdly melodramatic. Her tears and sobs annoyed
him.

"I am going," he said at last in his calm clear voice. "I don't wish to
be unkind, but I can't see you again. You have disappointed me."

She wept silently, and made no answer, but crept nearer. Her little
hands stretched blindly out, and appeared to be seeking for him. He
turned on his heel and left the room. In a few moments he was out of
the theatre.

Where he went to he hardly knew. He remembered wandering through dimly
lit streets, past gaunt, black-shadowed archways and evil-looking
houses. Women with hoarse voices and harsh laughter had called after
him. Drunkards had reeled by, cursing and chattering to themselves like
monstrous apes. He had seen grotesque children huddled upon door-steps,
and heard shrieks and oaths from gloomy courts.

As the dawn was just breaking, he found himself close to Covent Garden.
The darkness lifted, and, flushed with faint fires, the sky hollowed
itself into a perfect pearl. Huge carts filled with nodding lilies
rumbled slowly down the polished empty street. The air was heavy with
the perfume of the flowers, and their beauty seemed to bring him an
anodyne for his pain. He followed into the market and watched the men
unloading their waggons. A white-smocked carter offered him some
cherries. He thanked him, wondered why he refused to accept any money
for them, and began to eat them listlessly. They had been plucked at
midnight, and the coldness of the moon had entered into them. A long
line of boys carrying crates of striped tulips, and of yellow and red
roses, defiled in front of him, threading their way through the huge,
jade-green piles of vegetables. Under the portico, with its grey,
sun-bleached pillars, loitered a troop of draggled bareheaded girls,
waiting for the auction to be over. Others crowded round the swinging
doors of the coffee-house in the piazza. The heavy cart-horses slipped
and stamped upon the rough stones, shaking their bells and trappings.
Some of the drivers were lying asleep on a pile of sacks. Iris-necked
and pink-footed, the pigeons ran about picking up seeds.

After a little while, he hailed a hansom and drove home. For a few
moments he loitered upon the doorstep, looking round at the silent
square, with its blank, close-shuttered windows and its staring blinds.
The sky was pure opal now, and the roofs of the houses glistened like
silver against it. From some chimney opposite a thin wreath of smoke
was rising. It curled, a violet riband, through the nacre-coloured air.

In the huge gilt Venetian lantern, spoil of some Doge's barge, that
hung from the ceiling of the great, oak-panelled hall of entrance,
lights were still burning from three flickering jets: thin blue petals
of flame they seemed, rimmed with white fire. He turned them out and,
having thrown his hat and cape on the table, passed through the library
towards the door of his bedroom, a large octagonal chamber on the
ground floor that, in his new-born feeling for luxury, he had just had
decorated for himself and hung with some curious Renaissance tapestries
that had been discovered stored in a disused attic at Selby Royal. As
he was turning the handle of the door, his eye fell upon the portrait
Basil Hallward had painted of him. He started back as if in surprise.
Then he went on into his own room, looking somewhat puzzled. After he
had taken the button-hole out of his coat, he seemed to hesitate.
Finally, he came back, went over to the picture, and examined it. In
the dim arrested light that struggled through the cream-coloured silk
blinds, the face appeared to him to be a little changed. The expression
looked different. One would have said that there was a touch of cruelty
in the mouth. It was certainly strange.

He turned round and, walking to the window, drew up the blind. The
bright dawn flooded the room and swept the fantastic shadows into dusky
corners, where they lay shuddering. But the strange expression that he
had noticed in the face of the portrait seemed to linger there, to be
more intensified even. The quivering ardent sunlight showed him the
lines of cruelty round the mouth as clearly as if he had been looking
into a mirror after he had done some dreadful thing.

He winced and, taking up from the table an oval glass framed in ivory
Cupids, one of Lord Henry's many presents to him, glanced hurriedly
into its polished depths. No line like that warped his red lips. What
did it mean?

He rubbed his eyes, and came close to the picture, and examined it
again. There were no signs of any change when he looked into the actual
painting, and yet there was no doubt that the whole expression had
altered. It was not a mere fancy of his own. The thing was horribly
apparent.

He threw himself into a chair and began to think. Suddenly there
flashed across his mind what he had said in Basil Hallward's studio the
day the picture had been finished. Yes, he remembered it perfectly. He
had uttered a mad wish that he himself might remain young, and the
portrait grow old; that his own beauty might be untarnished, and the
face on the canvas bear the burden of his passions and his sins; that
the painted image might be seared with the lines of suffering and
thought, and that he might keep all the delicate bloom and loveliness
of his then just conscious boyhood. Surely his wish had not been
fulfilled? Such things were impossible. It seemed monstrous even to
think of them. And, yet, there was the picture before him, with the
touch of cruelty in the mouth.

Cruelty! Had he been cruel? It was the girl's fault, not his. He had
dreamed of her as a great artist, had given his love to her because he
had thought her great. Then she had disappointed him. She had been
shallow and unworthy. And, yet, a feeling of infinite regret came over
him, as he thought of her lying at his feet sobbing like a little
child. He remembered with what callousness he had watched her. Why had
he been made like that? Why had such a soul been given to him? But he
had suffered also. During the three terrible hours that the play had
lasted, he had lived centuries of pain, aeon upon aeon of torture. His
life was well worth hers. She had marred him for a moment, if he had
wounded her for an age. Besides, women were better suited to bear
sorrow than men. They lived on their emotions. They only thought of
their emotions. When they took lovers, it was merely to have some one
with whom they could have scenes. Lord Henry had told him that, and
Lord Henry knew what women were. Why should he trouble about Sibyl
Vane? She was nothing to him now.

But the picture? What was he to say of that? It held the secret of his
life, and told his story. It had taught him to love his own beauty.
Would it teach him to loathe his own soul? Would he ever look at it
again?

No; it was merely an illusion wrought on the troubled senses. The
horrible night that he had passed had left phantoms behind it. Suddenly
there had fallen upon his brain that tiny scarlet speck that makes men
mad. The picture had not changed. It was folly to think so.

Yet it was watching him, with its beautiful marred face and its cruel
smile. Its bright hair gleamed in the early sunlight. Its blue eyes met
his own. A sense of infinite pity, not for himself, but for the painted
image of himself, came over him. It had altered already, and would
alter more. Its gold would wither into grey. Its red and white roses
would die. For every sin that he committed, a stain would fleck and
wreck its fairness. But he would not sin. The picture, changed or
unchanged, would be to him the visible emblem of conscience. He would
resist temptation. He would not see Lord Henry any more-would not, at
any rate, listen to those subtle poisonous theories that in Basil
Hallward's garden had first stirred within him the passion for
impossible things. He would go back to Sibyl Vane, make her amends,
marry her, try to love her again. Yes, it was his duty to do so. She
must have suffered more than he had. Poor child! He had been selfish
and cruel to her. The fascination that she had exercised over him would
return. They would be happy together. His life with her would be
beautiful and pure.

He got up from his chair and drew a large screen right in front of the
portrait, shuddering as he glanced at it. "How horrible!" he murmured
to himself, and he walked across to the window and opened it. When he
stepped out on to the grass, he drew a deep breath. The fresh morning
air seemed to drive away all his sombre passions. He thought only of
Sibyl. A faint echo of his love came back to him. He repeated her name
over and over again. The birds that were singing in the dew-drenched
garden seemed to be telling the flowers about her.




CHAPTER VIII.


It was long past noon when he awoke. His valet had crept several times
on tiptoe into the room to see if he was stirring, and had wondered
what made his young master sleep so late. Finally his bell sounded, and
Victor came in softly with a cup of tea, and a pile of letters, on a
small tray of old Sevres china, and drew back the olive-satin curtains,
with their shimmering blue lining, that hung in front of the three tall
windows.

"Monsieur has well slept this morning," he said, smiling.

"What o'clock is it, Victor?" asked Dorian Gray drowsily.

"One hour and a quarter, Monsieur."

How late it was! He sat up, and having sipped some tea, turned over his
letters. One of them was from Lord Henry, and had been brought by hand
that morning. He hesitated for a moment, and then put it aside. The
others he opened listlessly. They contained the usual collection of
cards, invitations to dinner, tickets for private views, programmes of
charity concerts, and the like that are showered on fashionable young
men every morning during the season. There was a rather heavy bill for
a chased silver Louis-Quinze toilet-set that he had not yet had the
courage to send on to his guardians, who were extremely old-fashioned
people and did not realize that we live in an age when unnecessary
things are our only necessities; and there were several very
courteously worded communications from Jermyn Street money-lenders
offering to advance any sum of money at a moment's notice and at the
most reasonable rates of interest.

After about ten minutes he got up, and throwing on an elaborate
dressing-gown of silk-embroidered cashmere wool, passed into the
onyx-paved bathroom. The cool water refreshed him after his long sleep.
He seemed to have forgotten all that he had gone through. A dim sense
of having taken part in some strange tragedy came to him once or twice,
but there was the unreality of a dream about it.

As soon as he was dressed, he went into the library and sat down to a
light French breakfast that had been laid out for him on a small round
table close to the open window. It was an exquisite day. The warm air
seemed laden with spices. A bee flew in and buzzed round the
blue-dragon bowl that, filled with sulphur-yellow roses, stood before
him. He felt perfectly happy.

Suddenly his eye fell on the screen that he had placed in front of the
portrait, and he started.

"Too cold for Monsieur?" asked his valet, putting an omelette on the
table. "I shut the window?"

Dorian shook his head. "I am not cold," he murmured.

Was it all true? Had the portrait really changed? Or had it been simply
his own imagination that had made him see a look of evil where there
had been a look of joy? Surely a painted canvas could not alter? The
thing was absurd. It would serve as a tale to tell Basil some day. It
would make him smile.

And, yet, how vivid was his recollection of the whole thing! First in
the dim twilight, and then in the bright dawn, he had seen the touch of
cruelty round the warped lips. He almost dreaded his valet leaving the
room. He knew that when he was alone he would have to examine the
portrait. He was afraid of certainty. When the coffee and cigarettes
had been brought and the man turned to go, he felt a wild desire to
tell him to remain. As the door was closing behind him, he called him
back. The man stood waiting for his orders. Dorian looked at him for a
moment. "I am not at home to any one, Victor," he said with a sigh. The
man bowed and retired.

Then he rose from the table, lit a cigarette, and flung himself down on
a luxuriously cushioned couch that stood facing the screen. The screen
was an old one, of gilt Spanish leather, stamped and wrought with a
rather florid Louis-Quatorze pattern. He scanned it curiously,
wondering if ever before it had concealed the secret of a man's life.

Should he move it aside, after all? Why not let it stay there? What was
the use of knowing? If the thing was true, it was terrible. If it was
not true, why trouble about it? But what if, by some fate or deadlier
chance, eyes other than his spied behind and saw the horrible change?
What should he do if Basil Hallward came and asked to look at his own
picture? Basil would be sure to do that. No; the thing had to be
examined, and at once. Anything would be better than this dreadful
state of doubt.

He got up and locked both doors. At least he would be alone when he
looked upon the mask of his shame. Then he drew the screen aside and
saw himself face to face. It was perfectly true. The portrait had
altered.

As he often remembered afterwards, and always with no small wonder, he
found himself at first gazing at the portrait with a feeling of almost
scientific interest. That such a change should have taken place was
incredible to him. And yet it was a fact. Was there some subtle
affinity between the chemical atoms that shaped themselves into form
and colour on the canvas and the soul that was within him? Could it be
that what that soul thought, they realized?-that what it dreamed, they
made true? Or was there some other, more terrible reason? He shuddered,
and felt afraid, and, going back to the couch, lay there, gazing at the
picture in sickened horror.

One thing, however, he felt that it had done for him. It had made him
conscious how unjust, how cruel, he had been to Sibyl Vane. It was not
too late to make reparation for that. She could still be his wife. His
unreal and selfish love would yield to some higher influence, would be
transformed into some nobler passion, and the portrait that Basil
Hallward had painted of him would be a guide to him through life, would
be to him what holiness is to some, and conscience to others, and the
fear of God to us all. There were opiates for remorse, drugs that could
lull the moral sense to sleep. But here was a visible symbol of the
degradation of sin. Here was an ever-present sign of the ruin men
brought upon their souls.

Three o'clock struck, and four, and the half-hour rang its double
chime, but Dorian Gray did not stir. He was trying to gather up the
scarlet threads of life and to weave them into a pattern; to find his
way through the sanguine labyrinth of passion through which he was
wandering. He did not know what to do, or what to think. Finally, he
went over to the table and wrote a passionate letter to the girl he had
loved, imploring her forgiveness and accusing himself of madness. He
covered page after page with wild words of sorrow and wilder words of
pain. There is a luxury in self-reproach. When we blame ourselves, we
feel that no one else has a right to blame us. It is the confession,
not the priest, that gives us absolution. When Dorian had finished the
letter, he felt that he had been forgiven.

Suddenly there came a knock to the door, and he heard Lord Henry's
voice outside. "My dear boy, I must see you. Let me in at once. I can't
bear your shutting yourself up like this."

He made no answer at first, but remained quite still. The knocking
still continued and grew louder. Yes, it was better to let Lord Henry
in, and to explain to him the new life he was going to lead, to quarrel
with him if it became necessary to quarrel, to part if parting was
inevitable. He jumped up, drew the screen hastily across the picture,
and unlocked the door.

"I am so sorry for it all, Dorian," said Lord Henry as he entered. "But
you must not think too much about it."

"Do you mean about Sibyl Vane?" asked the lad.

"Yes, of course," answered Lord Henry, sinking into a chair and slowly
pulling off his yellow gloves. "It is dreadful, from one point of view,
but it was not your fault. Tell me, did you go behind and see her,
after the play was over?"

"Yes."

"I felt sure you had. Did you make a scene with her?"

"I was brutal, Harry-perfectly brutal. But it is all right now. I am
not sorry for anything that has happened. It has taught me to know
myself better."

"Ah, Dorian, I am so glad you take it in that way! I was afraid I would
find you plunged in remorse and tearing that nice curly hair of yours."

"I have got through all that," said Dorian, shaking his head and
smiling. "I am perfectly happy now. I know what conscience is, to begin
with. It is not what you told me it was. It is the divinest thing in
us. Don't sneer at it, Harry, any more-at least not before me. I want
to be good. I can't bear the idea of my soul being hideous."

"A very charming artistic basis for ethics, Dorian! I congratulate you
on it. But how are you going to begin?"

"By marrying Sibyl Vane."

"Marrying Sibyl Vane!" cried Lord Henry, standing up and looking at him
in perplexed amazement. "But, my dear Dorian-"

"Yes, Harry, I know what you are going to say. Something dreadful about
marriage. Don't say it. Don't ever say things of that kind to me again.
Two days ago I asked Sibyl to marry me. I am not going to break my word
to her. She is to be my wife."

"Your wife! Dorian! ... Didn't you get my letter? I wrote to you this
morning, and sent the note down by my own man."

"Your letter? Oh, yes, I remember. I have not read it yet, Harry. I was
afraid there might be something in it that I wouldn't like. You cut
life to pieces with your epigrams."

"You know nothing then?"

"What do you mean?"

Lord Henry walked across the room, and sitting down by Dorian Gray,
took both his hands in his own and held them tightly. "Dorian," he
said, "my letter-don't be frightened-was to tell you that Sibyl Vane is
dead."

A cry of pain broke from the lad's lips, and he leaped to his feet,
tearing his hands away from Lord Henry's grasp. "Dead! Sibyl dead! It
is not true! It is a horrible lie! How dare you say it?"

"It is quite true, Dorian," said Lord Henry, gravely. "It is in all the
morning papers. I wrote down to you to ask you not to see any one till
I came. There will have to be an inquest, of course, and you must not
be mixed up in it. Things like that make a man fashionable in Paris.
But in London people are so prejudiced. Here, one should never make
one's _d'ebut_ with a scandal. One should reserve that to give an
interest to one's old age. I suppose they don't know your name at the
theatre? If they don't, it is all right. Did any one see you going
round to her room? That is an important point."

Dorian did not answer for a few moments. He was dazed with horror.
Finally he stammered, in a stifled voice, "Harry, did you say an
inquest? What did you mean by that? Did Sibyl-? Oh, Harry, I can't bear
it! But be quick. Tell me everything at once."

"I have no doubt it was not an accident, Dorian, though it must be put
in that way to the public. It seems that as she was leaving the theatre
with her mother, about half-past twelve or so, she said she had
forgotten something upstairs. They waited some time for her, but she
did not come down again. They ultimately found her lying dead on the
floor of her dressing-room. She had swallowed something by mistake,
some dreadful thing they use at theatres. I don't know what it was, but
it had either prussic acid or white lead in it. I should fancy it was
prussic acid, as she seems to have died instantaneously."

"Harry, Harry, it is terrible!" cried the lad.

"Yes; it is very tragic, of course, but you must not get yourself mixed
up in it. I see by _The Standard_ that she was seventeen. I should have
thought she was almost younger than that. She looked such a child, and
seemed to know so little about acting. Dorian, you mustn't let this
thing get on your nerves. You must come and dine with me, and
afterwards we will look in at the opera. It is a Patti night, and
everybody will be there. You can come to my sister's box. She has got
some smart women with her."

"So I have murdered Sibyl Vane," said Dorian Gray, half to himself,
"murdered her as surely as if I had cut her little throat with a knife.
Yet the roses are not less lovely for all that. The birds sing just as
happily in my garden. And to-night I am to dine with you, and then go
on to the opera, and sup somewhere, I suppose, afterwards. How
extraordinarily dramatic life is! If I had read all this in a book,
Harry, I think I would have wept over it. Somehow, now that it has
happened actually, and to me, it seems far too wonderful for tears.
Here is the first passionate love-letter I have ever written in my
life. Strange, that my first passionate love-letter should have been
addressed to a dead girl. Can they feel, I wonder, those white silent
people we call the dead? Sibyl! Can she feel, or know, or listen? Oh,
Harry, how I loved her once! It seems years ago to me now. She was
everything to me. Then came that dreadful night-was it really only last
night?-when she played so badly, and my heart almost broke. She
explained it all to me. It was terribly pathetic. But I was not moved a
bit. I thought her shallow. Suddenly something happened that made me
afraid. I can't tell you what it was, but it was terrible. I said I
would go back to her. I felt I had done wrong. And now she is dead. My
God! My God! Harry, what shall I do? You don't know the danger I am in,
and there is nothing to keep me straight. She would have done that for
me. She had no right to kill herself. It was selfish of her."

"My dear Dorian," answered Lord Henry, taking a cigarette from his case
and producing a gold-latten matchbox, "the only way a woman can ever
reform a man is by boring him so completely that he loses all possible
interest in life. If you had married this girl, you would have been
wretched. Of course, you would have treated her kindly. One can always
be kind to people about whom one cares nothing. But she would have soon
found out that you were absolutely indifferent to her. And when a woman
finds that out about her husband, she either becomes dreadfully dowdy,
or wears very smart bonnets that some other woman's husband has to pay
for. I say nothing about the social mistake, which would have been
abject-which, of course, I would not have allowed-but I assure you that
in any case the whole thing would have been an absolute failure."

"I suppose it would," muttered the lad, walking up and down the room
and looking horribly pale. "But I thought it was my duty. It is not my
fault that this terrible tragedy has prevented my doing what was right.
I remember your saying once that there is a fatality about good
resolutions-that they are always made too late. Mine certainly were."

"Good resolutions are useless attempts to interfere with scientific
laws. Their origin is pure vanity. Their result is absolutely _nil_.
They give us, now and then, some of those luxurious sterile emotions
that have a certain charm for the weak. That is all that can be said
for them. They are simply cheques that men draw on a bank where they
have no account."

"Harry," cried Dorian Gray, coming over and sitting down beside him,
"why is it that I cannot feel this tragedy as much as I want to? I
don't think I am heartless. Do you?"

"You have done too many foolish things during the last fortnight to be
entitled to give yourself that name, Dorian," answered Lord Henry with
his sweet melancholy smile.

The lad frowned. "I don't like that explanation, Harry," he rejoined,
"but I am glad you don't think I am heartless. I am nothing of the
kind. I know I am not. And yet I must admit that this thing that has
happened does not affect me as it should. It seems to me to be simply
like a wonderful ending to a wonderful play. It has all the terrible
beauty of a Greek tragedy, a tragedy in which I took a great part, but
by which I have not been wounded."

"It is an interesting question," said Lord Henry, who found an
exquisite pleasure in playing on the lad's unconscious egotism, "an
extremely interesting question. I fancy that the true explanation is
this: It often happens that the real tragedies of life occur in such an
inartistic manner that they hurt us by their crude violence, their
absolute incoherence, their absurd want of meaning, their entire lack
of style. They affect us just as vulgarity affects us. They give us an
impression of sheer brute force, and we revolt against that. Sometimes,
however, a tragedy that possesses artistic elements of beauty crosses
our lives. If these elements of beauty are real, the whole thing simply
appeals to our sense of dramatic effect. Suddenly we find that we are
no longer the actors, but the spectators of the play. Or rather we are
both. We watch ourselves, and the mere wonder of the spectacle
enthralls us. In the present case, what is it that has really happened?
Some one has killed herself for love of you. I wish that I had ever had
such an experience. It would have made me in love with love for the
rest of my life. The people who have adored me-there have not been very
many, but there have been some-have always insisted on living on, long
after I had ceased to care for them, or they to care for me. They have
become stout and tedious, and when I meet them, they go in at once for
reminiscences. That awful memory of woman! What a fearful thing it is!
And what an utter intellectual stagnation it reveals! One should absorb
the colour of life, but one should never remember its details. Details
are always vulgar."

"I must sow poppies in my garden," sighed Dorian.

"There is no necessity," rejoined his companion. "Life has always
poppies in her hands. Of course, now and then things linger. I once
wore nothing but violets all through one season, as a form of artistic
mourning for a romance that would not die. Ultimately, however, it did
die. I forget what killed it. I think it was her proposing to sacrifice
the whole world for me. That is always a dreadful moment. It fills one
with the terror of eternity. Well-would you believe it?-a week ago, at
Lady Hampshire's, I found myself seated at dinner next the lady in
question, and she insisted on going over the whole thing again, and
digging up the past, and raking up the future. I had buried my romance
in a bed of asphodel. She dragged it out again and assured me that I
had spoiled her life. I am bound to state that she ate an enormous
dinner, so I did not feel any anxiety. But what a lack of taste she
showed! The one charm of the past is that it is the past. But women
never know when the curtain has fallen. They always want a sixth act,
and as soon as the interest of the play is entirely over, they propose
to continue it. If they were allowed their own way, every comedy would
have a tragic ending, and every tragedy would culminate in a farce.
They are charmingly artificial, but they have no sense of art. You are
more fortunate than I am. I assure you, Dorian, that not one of the
women I have known would have done for me what Sibyl Vane did for you.
Ordinary women always console themselves. Some of them do it by going
in for sentimental colours. Never trust a woman who wears mauve,
whatever her age may be, or a woman over thirty-five who is fond of
pink ribbons. It always means that they have a history. Others find a
great consolation in suddenly discovering the good qualities of their
husbands. They flaunt their conjugal felicity in one's face, as if it
were the most fascinating of sins. Religion consoles some. Its
mysteries have all the charm of a flirtation, a woman once told me, and
I can quite understand it. Besides, nothing makes one so vain as being
told that one is a sinner. Conscience makes egotists of us all. Yes;
there is really no end to the consolations that women find in modern
life. Indeed, I have not mentioned the most important one."

"What is that, Harry?" said the lad listlessly.

"Oh, the obvious consolation. Taking some one else's admirer when one
loses one's own. In good society that always whitewashes a woman. But
really, Dorian, how different Sibyl Vane must have been from all the
women one meets! There is something to me quite beautiful about her
death. I am glad I am living in a century when such wonders happen.
They make one believe in the reality of the things we all play with,
such as romance, passion, and love."

"I was terribly cruel to her. You forget that."

"I am afraid that women appreciate cruelty, downright cruelty, more
than anything else. They have wonderfully primitive instincts. We have
emancipated them, but they remain slaves looking for their masters, all
the same. They love being dominated. I am sure you were splendid. I
have never seen you really and absolutely angry, but I can fancy how
delightful you looked. And, after all, you said something to me the day
before yesterday that seemed to me at the time to be merely fanciful,
but that I see now was absolutely true, and it holds the key to
everything."

"What was that, Harry?"

"You said to me that Sibyl Vane represented to you all the heroines of
romance-that she was Desdemona one night, and Ophelia the other; that
if she died as Juliet, she came to life as Imogen."

"She will never come to life again now," muttered the lad, burying his
face in his hands.

"No, she will never come to life. She has played her last part. But you
must think of that lonely death in the tawdry dressing-room simply as a
strange lurid fragment from some Jacobean tragedy, as a wonderful scene
from Webster, or Ford, or Cyril Tourneur. The girl never really lived,
and so she has never really died. To you at least she was always a
dream, a phantom that flitted through Shakespeare's plays and left them
lovelier for its presence, a reed through which Shakespeare's music
sounded richer and more full of joy. The moment she touched actual
life, she marred it, and it marred her, and so she passed away. Mourn
for Ophelia, if you like. Put ashes on your head because Cordelia was
strangled. Cry out against Heaven because the daughter of Brabantio
died. But don't waste your tears over Sibyl Vane. She was less real
than they are."

There was a silence. The evening darkened in the room. Noiselessly, and
with silver feet, the shadows crept in from the garden. The colours
faded wearily out of things.

After some time Dorian Gray looked up. "You have explained me to
myself, Harry," he murmured with something of a sigh of relief. "I felt
all that you have said, but somehow I was afraid of it, and I could not
express it to myself. How well you know me! But we will not talk again
of what has happened. It has been a marvellous experience. That is all.
I wonder if life has still in store for me anything as marvellous."

"Life has everything in store for you, Dorian. There is nothing that
you, with your extraordinary good looks, will not be able to do."

"But suppose, Harry, I became haggard, and old, and wrinkled? What
then?"

"Ah, then," said Lord Henry, rising to go, "then, my dear Dorian, you
would have to fight for your victories. As it is, they are brought to
you. No, you must keep your good looks. We live in an age that reads
too much to be wise, and that thinks too much to be beautiful. We
cannot spare you. And now you had better dress and drive down to the
club. We are rather late, as it is."

"I think I shall join you at the opera, Harry. I feel too tired to eat
anything. What is the number of your sister's box?"

"Twenty-seven, I believe. It is on the grand tier. You will see her
name on the door. But I am sorry you won't come and dine."

"I don't feel up to it," said Dorian listlessly. "But I am awfully
obliged to you for all that you have said to me. You are certainly my
best friend. No one has ever understood me as you have."

"We are only at the beginning of our friendship, Dorian," answered Lord
Henry, shaking him by the hand. "Good-bye. I shall see you before
nine-thirty, I hope. Remember, Patti is singing."

As he closed the door behind him, Dorian Gray touched the bell, and in
a few minutes Victor appeared with the lamps and drew the blinds down.
He waited impatiently for him to go. The man seemed to take an
interminable time over everything.

As soon as he had left, he rushed to the screen and drew it back. No;
there was no further change in the picture. It had received the news of
Sibyl Vane's death before he had known of it himself. It was conscious
of the events of life as they occurred. The vicious cruelty that marred
the fine lines of the mouth had, no doubt, appeared at the very moment
that the girl had drunk the poison, whatever it was. Or was it
indifferent to results? Did it merely take cognizance of what passed
within the soul? He wondered, and hoped that some day he would see the
change taking place before his very eyes, shuddering as he hoped it.

Poor Sibyl! What a romance it had all been! She had often mimicked
death on the stage. Then Death himself had touched her and taken her
with him. How had she played that dreadful last scene? Had she cursed
him, as she died? No; she had died for love of him, and love would
always be a sacrament to him now. She had atoned for everything by the
sacrifice she had made of her life. He would not think any more of what
she had made him go through, on that horrible night at the theatre.
When he thought of her, it would be as a wonderful tragic figure sent
on to the world's stage to show the supreme reality of love. A
wonderful tragic figure? Tears came to his eyes as he remembered her
childlike look, and winsome fanciful ways, and shy tremulous grace. He
brushed them away hastily and looked again at the picture.

He felt that the time had really come for making his choice. Or had his
choice already been made? Yes, life had decided that for him-life, and
his own infinite curiosity about life. Eternal youth, infinite passion,
pleasures subtle and secret, wild joys and wilder sins-he was to have
all these things. The portrait was to bear the burden of his shame:
that was all.

A feeling of pain crept over him as he thought of the desecration that
was in store for the fair face on the canvas. Once, in boyish mockery
of Narcissus, he had kissed, or feigned to kiss, those painted lips
that now smiled so cruelly at him. Morning after morning he had sat
before the portrait wondering at its beauty, almost enamoured of it, as
it seemed to him at times. Was it to alter now with every mood to which
he yielded? Was it to become a monstrous and loathsome thing, to be
hidden away in a locked room, to be shut out from the sunlight that had
so often touched to brighter gold the waving wonder of its hair? The
pity of it! the pity of it!

For a moment, he thought of praying that the horrible sympathy that
existed between him and the picture might cease. It had changed in
answer to a prayer; perhaps in answer to a prayer it might remain
unchanged. And yet, who, that knew anything about life, would surrender
the chance of remaining always young, however fantastic that chance
might be, or with what fateful consequences it might be fraught?
Besides, was it really under his control? Had it indeed been prayer
that had produced the substitution? Might there not be some curious
scientific reason for it all? If thought could exercise its influence
upon a living organism, might not thought exercise an influence upon
dead and inorganic things? Nay, without thought or conscious desire,
might not things external to ourselves vibrate in unison with our moods
and passions, atom calling to atom in secret love or strange affinity?
But the reason was of no importance. He would never again tempt by a
prayer any terrible power. If the picture was to alter, it was to
alter. That was all. Why inquire too closely into it?

For there would be a real pleasure in watching it. He would be able to
follow his mind into its secret places. This portrait would be to him
the most magical of mirrors. As it had revealed to him his own body, so
it would reveal to him his own soul. And when winter came upon it, he
would still be standing where spring trembles on the verge of summer.
When the blood crept from its face, and left behind a pallid mask of
chalk with leaden eyes, he would keep the glamour of boyhood. Not one
blossom of his loveliness would ever fade. Not one pulse of his life
would ever weaken. Like the gods of the Greeks, he would be strong, and
fleet, and joyous. What did it matter what happened to the coloured
image on the canvas? He would be safe. That was everything.

He drew the screen back into its former place in front of the picture,
smiling as he did so, and passed into his bedroom, where his valet was
already waiting for him. An hour later he was at the opera, and Lord
Henry was leaning over his chair.




CHAPTER IX.


As he was sitting at breakfast next morning, Basil Hallward was shown
into the room.

"I am so glad I have found you, Dorian," he said gravely. "I called
last night, and they told me you were at the opera. Of course, I knew
that was impossible. But I wish you had left word where you had really
gone to. I passed a dreadful evening, half afraid that one tragedy
might be followed by another. I think you might have telegraphed for me
when you heard of it first. I read of it quite by chance in a late
edition of _The Globe_ that I picked up at the club. I came here at
once and was miserable at not finding you. I can't tell you how
heart-broken I am about the whole thing. I know what you must suffer.
But where were you? Did you go down and see the girl's mother? For a
moment I thought of following you there. They gave the address in the
paper. Somewhere in the Euston Road, isn't it? But I was afraid of
intruding upon a sorrow that I could not lighten. Poor woman! What a
state she must be in! And her only child, too! What did she say about
it all?"

"My dear Basil, how do I know?" murmured Dorian Gray, sipping some
pale-yellow wine from a delicate, gold-beaded bubble of Venetian glass
and looking dreadfully bored. "I was at the opera. You should have come
on there. I met Lady Gwendolen, Harry's sister, for the first time. We
were in her box. She is perfectly charming; and Patti sang divinely.
Don't talk about horrid subjects. If one doesn't talk about a thing, it
has never happened. It is simply expression, as Harry says, that gives
reality to things. I may mention that she was not the woman's only
child. There is a son, a charming fellow, I believe. But he is not on
the stage. He is a sailor, or something. And now, tell me about
yourself and what you are painting."

"You went to the opera?" said Hallward, speaking very slowly and with a
strained touch of pain in his voice. "You went to the opera while Sibyl
Vane was lying dead in some sordid lodging? You can talk to me of other
women being charming, and of Patti singing divinely, before the girl
you loved has even the quiet of a grave to sleep in? Why, man, there
are horrors in store for that little white body of hers!"

"Stop, Basil! I won't hear it!" cried Dorian, leaping to his feet. "You
must not tell me about things. What is done is done. What is past is
past."

"You call yesterday the past?"

"What has the actual lapse of time got to do with it? It is only
shallow people who require years to get rid of an emotion. A man who is
master of himself can end a sorrow as easily as he can invent a
pleasure. I don't want to be at the mercy of my emotions. I want to use
them, to enjoy them, and to dominate them."

"Dorian, this is horrible! Something has changed you completely. You
look exactly the same wonderful boy who, day after day, used to come
down to my studio to sit for his picture. But you were simple, natural,
and affectionate then. You were the most unspoiled creature in the
whole world. Now, I don't know what has come over you. You talk as if
you had no heart, no pity in you. It is all Harry's influence. I see
that."

The lad flushed up and, going to the window, looked out for a few
moments on the green, flickering, sun-lashed garden. "I owe a great
deal to Harry, Basil," he said at last, "more than I owe to you. You
only taught me to be vain."

"Well, I am punished for that, Dorian-or shall be some day."

"I don't know what you mean, Basil," he exclaimed, turning round. "I
don't know what you want. What do you want?"

"I want the Dorian Gray I used to paint," said the artist sadly.

"Basil," said the lad, going over to him and putting his hand on his
shoulder, "you have come too late. Yesterday, when I heard that Sibyl
Vane had killed herself-"

"Killed herself! Good heavens! is there no doubt about that?" cried
Hallward, looking up at him with an expression of horror.

"My dear Basil! Surely you don't think it was a vulgar accident? Of
course she killed herself."

The elder man buried his face in his hands. "How fearful," he muttered,
and a shudder ran through him.

"No," said Dorian Gray, "there is nothing fearful about it. It is one
of the great romantic tragedies of the age. As a rule, people who act
lead the most commonplace lives. They are good husbands, or faithful
wives, or something tedious. You know what I mean-middle-class virtue
and all that kind of thing. How different Sibyl was! She lived her
finest tragedy. She was always a heroine. The last night she played-the
night you saw her-she acted badly because she had known the reality of
love. When she knew its unreality, she died, as Juliet might have died.
She passed again into the sphere of art. There is something of the
martyr about her. Her death has all the pathetic uselessness of
martyrdom, all its wasted beauty. But, as I was saying, you must not
think I have not suffered. If you had come in yesterday at a particular
moment-about half-past five, perhaps, or a quarter to six-you would
have found me in tears. Even Harry, who was here, who brought me the
news, in fact, had no idea what I was going through. I suffered
immensely. Then it passed away. I cannot repeat an emotion. No one can,
except sentimentalists. And you are awfully unjust, Basil. You come
down here to console me. That is charming of you. You find me consoled,
and you are furious. How like a sympathetic person! You remind me of a
story Harry told me about a certain philanthropist who spent twenty
years of his life in trying to get some grievance redressed, or some
unjust law altered-I forget exactly what it was. Finally he succeeded,
and nothing could exceed his disappointment. He had absolutely nothing
to do, almost died of _ennui_, and became a confirmed misanthrope. And
besides, my dear old Basil, if you really want to console me, teach me
rather to forget what has happened, or to see it from a proper artistic
point of view. Was it not Gautier who used to write about _la
consolation des arts_? I remember picking up a little vellum-covered
book in your studio one day and chancing on that delightful phrase.
Well, I am not like that young man you told me of when we were down at
Marlow together, the young man who used to say that yellow satin could
console one for all the miseries of life. I love beautiful things that
one can touch and handle. Old brocades, green bronzes, lacquer-work,
carved ivories, exquisite surroundings, luxury, pomp-there is much to
be got from all these. But the artistic temperament that they create,
or at any rate reveal, is still more to me. To become the spectator of
one's own life, as Harry says, is to escape the suffering of life. I
know you are surprised at my talking to you like this. You have not
realized how I have developed. I was a schoolboy when you knew me. I am
a man now. I have new passions, new thoughts, new ideas. I am
different, but you must not like me less. I am changed, but you must
always be my friend. Of course, I am very fond of Harry. But I know
that you are better than he is. You are not stronger-you are too much
afraid of life-but you are better. And how happy we used to be
together! Don't leave me, Basil, and don't quarrel with me. I am what I
am. There is nothing more to be said."

The painter felt strangely moved. The lad was infinitely dear to him,
and his personality had been the great turning point in his art. He
could not bear the idea of reproaching him any more. After all, his
indifference was probably merely a mood that would pass away. There was
so much in him that was good, so much in him that was noble.

"Well, Dorian," he said at length, with a sad smile, "I won't speak to
you again about this horrible thing, after to-day. I only trust your
name won't be mentioned in connection with it. The inquest is to take
place this afternoon. Have they summoned you?"

Dorian shook his head, and a look of annoyance passed over his face at
the mention of the word "inquest." There was something so crude and
vulgar about everything of the kind. "They don't know my name," he
answered.

"But surely she did?"

"Only my Christian name, and that I am quite sure she never mentioned
to any one. She told me once that they were all rather curious to learn
who I was, and that she invariably told them my name was Prince
Charming. It was pretty of her. You must do me a drawing of Sibyl,
Basil. I should like to have something more of her than the memory of a
few kisses and some broken pathetic words."

"I will try and do something, Dorian, if it would please you. But you
must come and sit to me yourself again. I can't get on without you."

"I can never sit to you again, Basil. It is impossible!" he exclaimed,
starting back.

The painter stared at him. "My dear boy, what nonsense!" he cried. "Do
you mean to say you don't like what I did of you? Where is it? Why have
you pulled the screen in front of it? Let me look at it. It is the best
thing I have ever done. Do take the screen away, Dorian. It is simply
disgraceful of your servant hiding my work like that. I felt the room
looked different as I came in."

"My servant has nothing to do with it, Basil. You don't imagine I let
him arrange my room for me? He settles my flowers for me sometimes-that
is all. No; I did it myself. The light was too strong on the portrait."

"Too strong! Surely not, my dear fellow? It is an admirable place for
it. Let me see it." And Hallward walked towards the corner of the room.

A cry of terror broke from Dorian Gray's lips, and he rushed between
the painter and the screen. "Basil," he said, looking very pale, "you
must not look at it. I don't wish you to."

"Not look at my own work! You are not serious. Why shouldn't I look at
it?" exclaimed Hallward, laughing.

"If you try to look at it, Basil, on my word of honour I will never
speak to you again as long as I live. I am quite serious. I don't offer
any explanation, and you are not to ask for any. But, remember, if you
touch this screen, everything is over between us."

Hallward was thunderstruck. He looked at Dorian Gray in absolute
amazement. He had never seen him like this before. The lad was actually
pallid with rage. His hands were clenched, and the pupils of his eyes
were like disks of blue fire. He was trembling all over.

"Dorian!"

"Don't speak!"

"But what is the matter? Of course I won't look at it if you don't want
me to," he said, rather coldly, turning on his heel and going over
towards the window. "But, really, it seems rather absurd that I
shouldn't see my own work, especially as I am going to exhibit it in
Paris in the autumn. I shall probably have to give it another coat of
varnish before that, so I must see it some day, and why not to-day?"

"To exhibit it! You want to exhibit it?" exclaimed Dorian Gray, a
strange sense of terror creeping over him. Was the world going to be
shown his secret? Were people to gape at the mystery of his life? That
was impossible. Something-he did not know what-had to be done at once.

"Yes; I don't suppose you will object to that. Georges Petit is going
to collect all my best pictures for a special exhibition in the Rue de
S`eze, which will open the first week in October. The portrait will only
be away a month. I should think you could easily spare it for that
time. In fact, you are sure to be out of town. And if you keep it
always behind a screen, you can't care much about it."

Dorian Gray passed his hand over his forehead. There were beads of
perspiration there. He felt that he was on the brink of a horrible
danger. "You told me a month ago that you would never exhibit it," he
cried. "Why have you changed your mind? You people who go in for being
consistent have just as many moods as others have. The only difference
is that your moods are rather meaningless. You can't have forgotten
that you assured me most solemnly that nothing in the world would
induce you to send it to any exhibition. You told Harry exactly the
same thing." He stopped suddenly, and a gleam of light came into his
eyes. He remembered that Lord Henry had said to him once, half
seriously and half in jest, "If you want to have a strange quarter of
an hour, get Basil to tell you why he won't exhibit your picture. He
told me why he wouldn't, and it was a revelation to me." Yes, perhaps
Basil, too, had his secret. He would ask him and try.

"Basil," he said, coming over quite close and looking him straight in
the face, "we have each of us a secret. Let me know yours, and I shall
tell you mine. What was your reason for refusing to exhibit my
picture?"

The painter shuddered in spite of himself. "Dorian, if I told you, you
might like me less than you do, and you would certainly laugh at me. I
could not bear your doing either of those two things. If you wish me
never to look at your picture again, I am content. I have always you to
look at. If you wish the best work I have ever done to be hidden from
the world, I am satisfied. Your friendship is dearer to me than any
fame or reputation."

"No, Basil, you must tell me," insisted Dorian Gray. "I think I have a
right to know." His feeling of terror had passed away, and curiosity
had taken its place. He was determined to find out Basil Hallward's
mystery.

"Let us sit down, Dorian," said the painter, looking troubled. "Let us
sit down. And just answer me one question. Have you noticed in the
picture something curious?-something that probably at first did not
strike you, but that revealed itself to you suddenly?"

"Basil!" cried the lad, clutching the arms of his chair with trembling
hands and gazing at him with wild startled eyes.

"I see you did. Don't speak. Wait till you hear what I have to say.
Dorian, from the moment I met you, your personality had the most
extraordinary influence over me. I was dominated, soul, brain, and
power, by you. You became to me the visible incarnation of that unseen
ideal whose memory haunts us artists like an exquisite dream. I
worshipped you. I grew jealous of every one to whom you spoke. I wanted
to have you all to myself. I was only happy when I was with you. When
you were away from me, you were still present in my art.... Of course,
I never let you know anything about this. It would have been
impossible. You would not have understood it. I hardly understood it
myself. I only knew that I had seen perfection face to face, and that
the world had become wonderful to my eyes-too wonderful, perhaps, for
in such mad worships there is peril, the peril of losing them, no less
than the peril of keeping them.... Weeks and weeks went on, and I grew
more and more absorbed in you. Then came a new development. I had drawn
you as Paris in dainty armour, and as Adonis with huntsman's cloak and
polished boar-spear. Crowned with heavy lotus-blossoms you had sat on
the prow of Adrian's barge, gazing across the green turbid Nile. You
had leaned over the still pool of some Greek woodland and seen in the
water's silent silver the marvel of your own face. And it had all been
what art should be-unconscious, ideal, and remote. One day, a fatal day
I sometimes think, I determined to paint a wonderful portrait of you as
you actually are, not in the costume of dead ages, but in your own
dress and in your own time. Whether it was the realism of the method,
or the mere wonder of your own personality, thus directly presented to
me without mist or veil, I cannot tell. But I know that as I worked at
it, every flake and film of colour seemed to me to reveal my secret. I
grew afraid that others would know of my idolatry. I felt, Dorian, that
I had told too much, that I had put too much of myself into it. Then it
was that I resolved never to allow the picture to be exhibited. You
were a little annoyed; but then you did not realize all that it meant
to me. Harry, to whom I talked about it, laughed at me. But I did not
mind that. When the picture was finished, and I sat alone with it, I
felt that I was right.... Well, after a few days the thing left my
studio, and as soon as I had got rid of the intolerable fascination of
its presence, it seemed to me that I had been foolish in imagining that
I had seen anything in it, more than that you were extremely
good-looking and that I could paint. Even now I cannot help feeling
that it is a mistake to think that the passion one feels in creation is
ever really shown in the work one creates. Art is always more abstract
than we fancy. Form and colour tell us of form and colour-that is all.
It often seems to me that art conceals the artist far more completely
than it ever reveals him. And so when I got this offer from Paris, I
determined to make your portrait the principal thing in my exhibition.
It never occurred to me that you would refuse. I see now that you were
right. The picture cannot be shown. You must not be angry with me,
Dorian, for what I have told you. As I said to Harry, once, you are
made to be worshipped."

Dorian Gray drew a long breath. The colour came back to his cheeks, and
a smile played about his lips. The peril was over. He was safe for the
time. Yet he could not help feeling infinite pity for the painter who
had just made this strange confession to him, and wondered if he
himself would ever be so dominated by the personality of a friend. Lord
Henry had the charm of being very dangerous. But that was all. He was
too clever and too cynical to be really fond of. Would there ever be
some one who would fill him with a strange idolatry? Was that one of
the things that life had in store?

"It is extraordinary to me, Dorian," said Hallward, "that you should
have seen this in the portrait. Did you really see it?"

"I saw something in it," he answered, "something that seemed to me very
curious."

"Well, you don't mind my looking at the thing now?"

Dorian shook his head. "You must not ask me that, Basil. I could not
possibly let you stand in front of that picture."

"You will some day, surely?"

"Never."

"Well, perhaps you are right. And now good-bye, Dorian. You have been
the one person in my life who has really influenced my art. Whatever I
have done that is good, I owe to you. Ah! you don't know what it cost
me to tell you all that I have told you."

"My dear Basil," said Dorian, "what have you told me? Simply that you
felt that you admired me too much. That is not even a compliment."

"It was not intended as a compliment. It was a confession. Now that I
have made it, something seems to have gone out of me. Perhaps one
should never put one's worship into words."

"It was a very disappointing confession."

"Why, what did you expect, Dorian? You didn't see anything else in the
picture, did you? There was nothing else to see?"

"No; there was nothing else to see. Why do you ask? But you mustn't
talk about worship. It is foolish. You and I are friends, Basil, and we
must always remain so."

"You have got Harry," said the painter sadly.

"Oh, Harry!" cried the lad, with a ripple of laughter. "Harry spends
his days in saying what is incredible and his evenings in doing what is
improbable. Just the sort of life I would like to lead. But still I
don't think I would go to Harry if I were in trouble. I would sooner go
to you, Basil."

"You will sit to me again?"

"Impossible!"

"You spoil my life as an artist by refusing, Dorian. No man comes
across two ideal things. Few come across one."

"I can't explain it to you, Basil, but I must never sit to you again.
There is something fatal about a portrait. It has a life of its own. I
will come and have tea with you. That will be just as pleasant."

"Pleasanter for you, I am afraid," murmured Hallward regretfully. "And
now good-bye. I am sorry you won't let me look at the picture once
again. But that can't be helped. I quite understand what you feel about
it."

As he left the room, Dorian Gray smiled to himself. Poor Basil! How
little he knew of the true reason! And how strange it was that, instead
of having been forced to reveal his own secret, he had succeeded,
almost by chance, in wresting a secret from his friend! How much that
strange confession explained to him! The painter's absurd fits of
jealousy, his wild devotion, his extravagant panegyrics, his curious
reticences-he understood them all now, and he felt sorry. There seemed
to him to be something tragic in a friendship so coloured by romance.

He sighed and touched the bell. The portrait must be hidden away at all
costs. He could not run such a risk of discovery again. It had been mad
of him to have allowed the thing to remain, even for an hour, in a room
to which any of his friends had access.




CHAPTER X.


When his servant entered, he looked at him steadfastly and wondered if
he had thought of peering behind the screen. The man was quite
impassive and waited for his orders. Dorian lit a cigarette and walked
over to the glass and glanced into it. He could see the reflection of
Victor's face perfectly. It was like a placid mask of servility. There
was nothing to be afraid of, there. Yet he thought it best to be on his
guard.

Speaking very slowly, he told him to tell the house-keeper that he
wanted to see her, and then to go to the frame-maker and ask him to
send two of his men round at once. It seemed to him that as the man
left the room his eyes wandered in the direction of the screen. Or was
that merely his own fancy?

After a few moments, in her black silk dress, with old-fashioned thread
mittens on her wrinkled hands, Mrs. Leaf bustled into the library. He
asked her for the key of the schoolroom.

"The old schoolroom, Mr. Dorian?" she exclaimed. "Why, it is full of
dust. I must get it arranged and put straight before you go into it. It
is not fit for you to see, sir. It is not, indeed."

"I don't want it put straight, Leaf. I only want the key."

"Well, sir, you'll be covered with cobwebs if you go into it. Why, it
hasn't been opened for nearly five years-not since his lordship died."

He winced at the mention of his grandfather. He had hateful memories of
him. "That does not matter," he answered. "I simply want to see the
place-that is all. Give me the key."

"And here is the key, sir," said the old lady, going over the contents
of her bunch with tremulously uncertain hands. "Here is the key. I'll
have it off the bunch in a moment. But you don't think of living up
there, sir, and you so comfortable here?"

"No, no," he cried petulantly. "Thank you, Leaf. That will do."

She lingered for a few moments, and was garrulous over some detail of
the household. He sighed and told her to manage things as she thought
best. She left the room, wreathed in smiles.

As the door closed, Dorian put the key in his pocket and looked round
the room. His eye fell on a large, purple satin coverlet heavily
embroidered with gold, a splendid piece of late seventeenth-century
Venetian work that his grandfather had found in a convent near Bologna.
Yes, that would serve to wrap the dreadful thing in. It had perhaps
served often as a pall for the dead. Now it was to hide something that
had a corruption of its own, worse than the corruption of death
itself-something that would breed horrors and yet would never die. What
the worm was to the corpse, his sins would be to the painted image on
the canvas. They would mar its beauty and eat away its grace. They
would defile it and make it shameful. And yet the thing would still
live on. It would be always alive.

He shuddered, and for a moment he regretted that he had not told Basil
the true reason why he had wished to hide the picture away. Basil would
have helped him to resist Lord Henry's influence, and the still more
poisonous influences that came from his own temperament. The love that
he bore him-for it was really love-had nothing in it that was not noble
and intellectual. It was not that mere physical admiration of beauty
that is born of the senses and that dies when the senses tire. It was
such love as Michelangelo had known, and Montaigne, and Winckelmann,
and Shakespeare himself. Yes, Basil could have saved him. But it was
too late now. The past could always be annihilated. Regret, denial, or
forgetfulness could do that. But the future was inevitable. There were
passions in him that would find their terrible outlet, dreams that
would make the shadow of their evil real.

He took up from the couch the great purple-and-gold texture that
covered it, and, holding it in his hands, passed behind the screen. Was
the face on the canvas viler than before? It seemed to him that it was
unchanged, and yet his loathing of it was intensified. Gold hair, blue
eyes, and rose-red lips-they all were there. It was simply the
expression that had altered. That was horrible in its cruelty. Compared
to what he saw in it of censure or rebuke, how shallow Basil's
reproaches about Sibyl Vane had been!-how shallow, and of what little
account! His own soul was looking out at him from the canvas and
calling him to judgement. A look of pain came across him, and he flung
the rich pall over the picture. As he did so, a knock came to the door.
He passed out as his servant entered.

"The persons are here, Monsieur."

He felt that the man must be got rid of at once. He must not be allowed
to know where the picture was being taken to. There was something sly
about him, and he had thoughtful, treacherous eyes. Sitting down at the
writing-table he scribbled a note to Lord Henry, asking him to send him
round something to read and reminding him that they were to meet at
eight-fifteen that evening.

"Wait for an answer," he said, handing it to him, "and show the men in
here."

In two or three minutes there was another knock, and Mr. Hubbard
himself, the celebrated frame-maker of South Audley Street, came in
with a somewhat rough-looking young assistant. Mr. Hubbard was a
florid, red-whiskered little man, whose admiration for art was
considerably tempered by the inveterate impecuniosity of most of the
artists who dealt with him. As a rule, he never left his shop. He
waited for people to come to him. But he always made an exception in
favour of Dorian Gray. There was something about Dorian that charmed
everybody. It was a pleasure even to see him.

"What can I do for you, Mr. Gray?" he said, rubbing his fat freckled
hands. "I thought I would do myself the honour of coming round in
person. I have just got a beauty of a frame, sir. Picked it up at a
sale. Old Florentine. Came from Fonthill, I believe. Admirably suited
for a religious subject, Mr. Gray."

"I am so sorry you have given yourself the trouble of coming round, Mr.
Hubbard. I shall certainly drop in and look at the frame-though I don't
go in much at present for religious art-but to-day I only want a
picture carried to the top of the house for me. It is rather heavy, so
I thought I would ask you to lend me a couple of your men."

"No trouble at all, Mr. Gray. I am delighted to be of any service to
you. Which is the work of art, sir?"

"This," replied Dorian, moving the screen back. "Can you move it,
covering and all, just as it is? I don't want it to get scratched going
upstairs."

"There will be no difficulty, sir," said the genial frame-maker,
beginning, with the aid of his assistant, to unhook the picture from
the long brass chains by which it was suspended. "And, now, where shall
we carry it to, Mr. Gray?"

"I will show you the way, Mr. Hubbard, if you will kindly follow me. Or
perhaps you had better go in front. I am afraid it is right at the top
of the house. We will go up by the front staircase, as it is wider."

He held the door open for them, and they passed out into the hall and
began the ascent. The elaborate character of the frame had made the
picture extremely bulky, and now and then, in spite of the obsequious
protests of Mr. Hubbard, who had the true tradesman's spirited dislike
of seeing a gentleman doing anything useful, Dorian put his hand to it
so as to help them.

"Something of a load to carry, sir," gasped the little man when they
reached the top landing. And he wiped his shiny forehead.

"I am afraid it is rather heavy," murmured Dorian as he unlocked the
door that opened into the room that was to keep for him the curious
secret of his life and hide his soul from the eyes of men.

He had not entered the place for more than four years-not, indeed,
since he had used it first as a play-room when he was a child, and then
as a study when he grew somewhat older. It was a large,
well-proportioned room, which had been specially built by the last Lord
Kelso for the use of the little grandson whom, for his strange likeness
to his mother, and also for other reasons, he had always hated and
desired to keep at a distance. It appeared to Dorian to have but little
changed. There was the huge Italian _cassone_, with its fantastically
painted panels and its tarnished gilt mouldings, in which he had so
often hidden himself as a boy. There the satinwood book-case filled
with his dog-eared schoolbooks. On the wall behind it was hanging the
same ragged Flemish tapestry where a faded king and queen were playing
chess in a garden, while a company of hawkers rode by, carrying hooded
birds on their gauntleted wrists. How well he remembered it all! Every
moment of his lonely childhood came back to him as he looked round. He
recalled the stainless purity of his boyish life, and it seemed
horrible to him that it was here the fatal portrait was to be hidden
away. How little he had thought, in those dead days, of all that was in
store for him!

But there was no other place in the house so secure from prying eyes as
this. He had the key, and no one else could enter it. Beneath its
purple pall, the face painted on the canvas could grow bestial, sodden,
and unclean. What did it matter? No one could see it. He himself would
not see it. Why should he watch the hideous corruption of his soul? He
kept his youth-that was enough. And, besides, might not his nature grow
finer, after all? There was no reason that the future should be so full
of shame. Some love might come across his life, and purify him, and
shield him from those sins that seemed to be already stirring in spirit
and in flesh-those curious unpictured sins whose very mystery lent them
their subtlety and their charm. Perhaps, some day, the cruel look would
have passed away from the scarlet sensitive mouth, and he might show to
the world Basil Hallward's masterpiece.

No; that was impossible. Hour by hour, and week by week, the thing upon
the canvas was growing old. It might escape the hideousness of sin, but
the hideousness of age was in store for it. The cheeks would become
hollow or flaccid. Yellow crow's feet would creep round the fading eyes
and make them horrible. The hair would lose its brightness, the mouth
would gape or droop, would be foolish or gross, as the mouths of old
men are. There would be the wrinkled throat, the cold, blue-veined
hands, the twisted body, that he remembered in the grandfather who had
been so stern to him in his boyhood. The picture had to be concealed.
There was no help for it.

"Bring it in, Mr. Hubbard, please," he said, wearily, turning round. "I
am sorry I kept you so long. I was thinking of something else."

"Always glad to have a rest, Mr. Gray," answered the frame-maker, who
was still gasping for breath. "Where shall we put it, sir?"

"Oh, anywhere. Here: this will do. I don't want to have it hung up.
Just lean it against the wall. Thanks."

"Might one look at the work of art, sir?"

Dorian started. "It would not interest you, Mr. Hubbard," he said,
keeping his eye on the man. He felt ready to leap upon him and fling
him to the ground if he dared to lift the gorgeous hanging that
concealed the secret of his life. "I shan't trouble you any more now. I
am much obliged for your kindness in coming round."

"Not at all, not at all, Mr. Gray. Ever ready to do anything for you,
sir." And Mr. Hubbard tramped downstairs, followed by the assistant,
who glanced back at Dorian with a look of shy wonder in his rough
uncomely face. He had never seen any one so marvellous.

When the sound of their footsteps had died away, Dorian locked the door
and put the key in his pocket. He felt safe now. No one would ever look
upon the horrible thing. No eye but his would ever see his shame.

On reaching the library, he found that it was just after five o'clock
and that the tea had been already brought up. On a little table of dark
perfumed wood thickly incrusted with nacre, a present from Lady Radley,
his guardian's wife, a pretty professional invalid who had spent the
preceding winter in Cairo, was lying a note from Lord Henry, and beside
it was a book bound in yellow paper, the cover slightly torn and the
edges soiled. A copy of the third edition of _The St. James's Gazette_
had been placed on the tea-tray. It was evident that Victor had
returned. He wondered if he had met the men in the hall as they were
leaving the house and had wormed out of them what they had been doing.
He would be sure to miss the picture-had no doubt missed it already,
while he had been laying the tea-things. The screen had not been set
back, and a blank space was visible on the wall. Perhaps some night he
might find him creeping upstairs and trying to force the door of the
room. It was a horrible thing to have a spy in one's house. He had
heard of rich men who had been blackmailed all their lives by some
servant who had read a letter, or overheard a conversation, or picked
up a card with an address, or found beneath a pillow a withered flower
or a shred of crumpled lace.

He sighed, and having poured himself out some tea, opened Lord Henry's
note. It was simply to say that he sent him round the evening paper,
and a book that might interest him, and that he would be at the club at
eight-fifteen. He opened _The St. James's_ languidly, and looked
through it. A red pencil-mark on the fifth page caught his eye. It drew
attention to the following paragraph:

INQUEST ON AN ACTRESS.-An inquest was held this morning at the Bell
Tavern, Hoxton Road, by Mr. Danby, the District Coroner, on the body of
Sibyl Vane, a young actress recently engaged at the Royal Theatre,
Holborn. A verdict of death by misadventure was returned. Considerable
sympathy was expressed for the mother of the deceased, who was greatly
affected during the giving of her own evidence, and that of Dr.
Birrell, who had made the post-mortem examination of the deceased.


He frowned, and tearing the paper in two, went across the room and
flung the pieces away. How ugly it all was! And how horribly real
ugliness made things! He felt a little annoyed with Lord Henry for
having sent him the report. And it was certainly stupid of him to have
marked it with red pencil. Victor might have read it. The man knew more
than enough English for that.

Perhaps he had read it and had begun to suspect something. And, yet,
what did it matter? What had Dorian Gray to do with Sibyl Vane's death?
There was nothing to fear. Dorian Gray had not killed her.

His eye fell on the yellow book that Lord Henry had sent him. What was
it, he wondered. He went towards the little, pearl-coloured octagonal
stand that had always looked to him like the work of some strange
Egyptian bees that wrought in silver, and taking up the volume, flung
himself into an arm-chair and began to turn over the leaves. After a
few minutes he became absorbed. It was the strangest book that he had
ever read. It seemed to him that in exquisite raiment, and to the
delicate sound of flutes, the sins of the world were passing in dumb
show before him. Things that he had dimly dreamed of were suddenly made
real to him. Things of which he had never dreamed were gradually
revealed.

It was a novel without a plot and with only one character, being,
indeed, simply a psychological study of a certain young Parisian who
spent his life trying to realize in the nineteenth century all the
passions and modes of thought that belonged to every century except his
own, and to sum up, as it were, in himself the various moods through
which the world-spirit had ever passed, loving for their mere
artificiality those renunciations that men have unwisely called virtue,
as much as those natural rebellions that wise men still call sin. The
style in which it was written was that curious jewelled style, vivid
and obscure at once, full of _argot_ and of archaisms, of technical
expressions and of elaborate paraphrases, that characterizes the work
of some of the finest artists of the French school of _Symbolistes_.
There were in it metaphors as monstrous as orchids and as subtle in
colour. The life of the senses was described in the terms of mystical
philosophy. One hardly knew at times whether one was reading the
spiritual ecstasies of some mediaeval saint or the morbid confessions of
a modern sinner. It was a poisonous book. The heavy odour of incense
seemed to cling about its pages and to trouble the brain. The mere
cadence of the sentences, the subtle monotony of their music, so full
as it was of complex refrains and movements elaborately repeated,
produced in the mind of the lad, as he passed from chapter to chapter,
a form of reverie, a malady of dreaming, that made him unconscious of
the falling day and creeping shadows.

Cloudless, and pierced by one solitary star, a copper-green sky gleamed
through the windows. He read on by its wan light till he could read no
more. Then, after his valet had reminded him several times of the
lateness of the hour, he got up, and going into the next room, placed
the book on the little Florentine table that always stood at his
bedside and began to dress for dinner.

It was almost nine o'clock before he reached the club, where he found
Lord Henry sitting alone, in the morning-room, looking very much bored.

"I am so sorry, Harry," he cried, "but really it is entirely your
fault. That book you sent me so fascinated me that I forgot how the
time was going."

"Yes, I thought you would like it," replied his host, rising from his
chair.

"I didn't say I liked it, Harry. I said it fascinated me. There is a
great difference."

"Ah, you have discovered that?" murmured Lord Henry. And they passed
into the dining-room.




CHAPTER XI.


For years, Dorian Gray could not free himself from the influence of
this book. Or perhaps it would be more accurate to say that he never
sought to free himself from it. He procured from Paris no less than
nine large-paper copies of the first edition, and had them bound in
different colours, so that they might suit his various moods and the
changing fancies of a nature over which he seemed, at times, to have
almost entirely lost control. The hero, the wonderful young Parisian in
whom the romantic and the scientific temperaments were so strangely
blended, became to him a kind of prefiguring type of himself. And,
indeed, the whole book seemed to him to contain the story of his own
life, written before he had lived it.

In one point he was more fortunate than the novel's fantastic hero. He
never knew-never, indeed, had any cause to know-that somewhat grotesque
dread of mirrors, and polished metal surfaces, and still water which
came upon the young Parisian so early in his life, and was occasioned
by the sudden decay of a beau that had once, apparently, been so
remarkable. It was with an almost cruel joy-and perhaps in nearly every
joy, as certainly in every pleasure, cruelty has its place-that he used
to read the latter part of the book, with its really tragic, if
somewhat overemphasized, account of the sorrow and despair of one who
had himself lost what in others, and the world, he had most dearly
valued.

For the wonderful beauty that had so fascinated Basil Hallward, and
many others besides him, seemed never to leave him. Even those who had
heard the most evil things against him-and from time to time strange
rumours about his mode of life crept through London and became the
chatter of the clubs-could not believe anything to his dishonour when
they saw him. He had always the look of one who had kept himself
unspotted from the world. Men who talked grossly became silent when
Dorian Gray entered the room. There was something in the purity of his
face that rebuked them. His mere presence seemed to recall to them the
memory of the innocence that they had tarnished. They wondered how one
so charming and graceful as he was could have escaped the stain of an
age that was at once sordid and sensual.

Often, on returning home from one of those mysterious and prolonged
absences that gave rise to such strange conjecture among those who were
his friends, or thought that they were so, he himself would creep
upstairs to the locked room, open the door with the key that never left
him now, and stand, with a mirror, in front of the portrait that Basil
Hallward had painted of him, looking now at the evil and aging face on
the canvas, and now at the fair young face that laughed back at him
from the polished glass. The very sharpness of the contrast used to
quicken his sense of pleasure. He grew more and more enamoured of his
own beauty, more and more interested in the corruption of his own soul.
He would examine with minute care, and sometimes with a monstrous and
terrible delight, the hideous lines that seared the wrinkling forehead
or crawled around the heavy sensual mouth, wondering sometimes which
were the more horrible, the signs of sin or the signs of age. He would
place his white hands beside the coarse bloated hands of the picture,
and smile. He mocked the misshapen body and the failing limbs.

There were moments, indeed, at night, when, lying sleepless in his own
delicately scented chamber, or in the sordid room of the little
ill-famed tavern near the docks which, under an assumed name and in
disguise, it was his habit to frequent, he would think of the ruin he
had brought upon his soul with a pity that was all the more poignant
because it was purely selfish. But moments such as these were rare.
That curiosity about life which Lord Henry had first stirred in him, as
they sat together in the garden of their friend, seemed to increase
with gratification. The more he knew, the more he desired to know. He
had mad hungers that grew more ravenous as he fed them.

Yet he was not really reckless, at any rate in his relations to
society. Once or twice every month during the winter, and on each
Wednesday evening while the season lasted, he would throw open to the
world his beautiful house and have the most celebrated musicians of the
day to charm his guests with the wonders of their art. His little
dinners, in the settling of which Lord Henry always assisted him, were
noted as much for the careful selection and placing of those invited,
as for the exquisite taste shown in the decoration of the table, with
its subtle symphonic arrangements of exotic flowers, and embroidered
cloths, and antique plate of gold and silver. Indeed, there were many,
especially among the very young men, who saw, or fancied that they saw,
in Dorian Gray the true realization of a type of which they had often
dreamed in Eton or Oxford days, a type that was to combine something of
the real culture of the scholar with all the grace and distinction and
perfect manner of a citizen of the world. To them he seemed to be of
the company of those whom Dante describes as having sought to "make
themselves perfect by the worship of beauty." Like Gautier, he was one
for whom "the visible world existed."

And, certainly, to him life itself was the first, the greatest, of the
arts, and for it all the other arts seemed to be but a preparation.
Fashion, by which what is really fantastic becomes for a moment
universal, and dandyism, which, in its own way, is an attempt to assert
the absolute modernity of beauty, had, of course, their fascination for
him. His mode of dressing, and the particular styles that from time to
time he affected, had their marked influence on the young exquisites of
the Mayfair balls and Pall Mall club windows, who copied him in
everything that he did, and tried to reproduce the accidental charm of
his graceful, though to him only half-serious, fopperies.

For, while he was but too ready to accept the position that was almost
immediately offered to him on his coming of age, and found, indeed, a
subtle pleasure in the thought that he might really become to the
London of his own day what to imperial Neronian Rome the author of the
Satyricon once had been, yet in his inmost heart he desired to be
something more than a mere _arbiter elegantiarum_, to be consulted on
the wearing of a jewel, or the knotting of a necktie, or the conduct of
a cane. He sought to elaborate some new scheme of life that would have
its reasoned philosophy and its ordered principles, and find in the
spiritualizing of the senses its highest realization.

The worship of the senses has often, and with much justice, been
decried, men feeling a natural instinct of terror about passions and
sensations that seem stronger than themselves, and that they are
conscious of sharing with the less highly organized forms of existence.
But it appeared to Dorian Gray that the true nature of the senses had
never been understood, and that they had remained savage and animal
merely because the world had sought to starve them into submission or
to kill them by pain, instead of aiming at making them elements of a
new spirituality, of which a fine instinct for beauty was to be the
dominant characteristic. As he looked back upon man moving through
history, he was haunted by a feeling of loss. So much had been
surrendered! and to such little purpose! There had been mad wilful
rejections, monstrous forms of self-torture and self-denial, whose
origin was fear and whose result was a degradation infinitely more
terrible than that fancied degradation from which, in their ignorance,
they had sought to escape; Nature, in her wonderful irony, driving out
the anchorite to feed with the wild animals of the desert and giving to
the hermit the beasts of the field as his companions.

Yes: there was to be, as Lord Henry had prophesied, a new Hedonism that
was to recreate life and to save it from that harsh uncomely puritanism
that is having, in our own day, its curious revival. It was to have its
service of the intellect, certainly, yet it was never to accept any
theory or system that would involve the sacrifice of any mode of
passionate experience. Its aim, indeed, was to be experience itself,
and not the fruits of experience, sweet or bitter as they might be. Of
the asceticism that deadens the senses, as of the vulgar profligacy
that dulls them, it was to know nothing. But it was to teach man to
concentrate himself upon the moments of a life that is itself but a
moment.

There are few of us who have not sometimes wakened before dawn, either
after one of those dreamless nights that make us almost enamoured of
death, or one of those nights of horror and misshapen joy, when through
the chambers of the brain sweep phantoms more terrible than reality
itself, and instinct with that vivid life that lurks in all grotesques,
and that lends to Gothic art its enduring vitality, this art being, one
might fancy, especially the art of those whose minds have been troubled
with the malady of reverie. Gradually white fingers creep through the
curtains, and they appear to tremble. In black fantastic shapes, dumb
shadows crawl into the corners of the room and crouch there. Outside,
there is the stirring of birds among the leaves, or the sound of men
going forth to their work, or the sigh and sob of the wind coming down
from the hills and wandering round the silent house, as though it
feared to wake the sleepers and yet must needs call forth sleep from
her purple cave. Veil after veil of thin dusky gauze is lifted, and by
degrees the forms and colours of things are restored to them, and we
watch the dawn remaking the world in its antique pattern. The wan
mirrors get back their mimic life. The flameless tapers stand where we
had left them, and beside them lies the half-cut book that we had been
studying, or the wired flower that we had worn at the ball, or the
letter that we had been afraid to read, or that we had read too often.
Nothing seems to us changed. Out of the unreal shadows of the night
comes back the real life that we had known. We have to resume it where
we had left off, and there steals over us a terrible sense of the
necessity for the continuance of energy in the same wearisome round of
stereotyped habits, or a wild longing, it may be, that our eyelids
might open some morning upon a world that had been refashioned anew in
the darkness for our pleasure, a world in which things would have fresh
shapes and colours, and be changed, or have other secrets, a world in
which the past would have little or no place, or survive, at any rate,
in no conscious form of obligation or regret, the remembrance even of
joy having its bitterness and the memories of pleasure their pain.

It was the creation of such worlds as these that seemed to Dorian Gray
to be the true object, or amongst the true objects, of life; and in his
search for sensations that would be at once new and delightful, and
possess that element of strangeness that is so essential to romance, he
would often adopt certain modes of thought that he knew to be really
alien to his nature, abandon himself to their subtle influences, and
then, having, as it were, caught their colour and satisfied his
intellectual curiosity, leave them with that curious indifference that
is not incompatible with a real ardour of temperament, and that,
indeed, according to certain modern psychologists, is often a condition
of it.

It was rumoured of him once that he was about to join the Roman
Catholic communion, and certainly the Roman ritual had always a great
attraction for him. The daily sacrifice, more awful really than all the
sacrifices of the antique world, stirred him as much by its superb
rejection of the evidence of the senses as by the primitive simplicity
of its elements and the eternal pathos of the human tragedy that it
sought to symbolize. He loved to kneel down on the cold marble pavement
and watch the priest, in his stiff flowered dalmatic, slowly and with
white hands moving aside the veil of the tabernacle, or raising aloft
the jewelled, lantern-shaped monstrance with that pallid wafer that at
times, one would fain think, is indeed the "_panis caelestis_," the
bread of angels, or, robed in the garments of the Passion of Christ,
breaking the Host into the chalice and smiting his breast for his sins.
The fuming censers that the grave boys, in their lace and scarlet,
tossed into the air like great gilt flowers had their subtle
fascination for him. As he passed out, he used to look with wonder at
the black confessionals and long to sit in the dim shadow of one of
them and listen to men and women whispering through the worn grating
the true story of their lives.

But he never fell into the error of arresting his intellectual
development by any formal acceptance of creed or system, or of
mistaking, for a house in which to live, an inn that is but suitable
for the sojourn of a night, or for a few hours of a night in which
there are no stars and the moon is in travail. Mysticism, with its
marvellous power of making common things strange to us, and the subtle
antinomianism that always seems to accompany it, moved him for a
season; and for a season he inclined to the materialistic doctrines of
the _Darwinismus_ movement in Germany, and found a curious pleasure in
tracing the thoughts and passions of men to some pearly cell in the
brain, or some white nerve in the body, delighting in the conception of
the absolute dependence of the spirit on certain physical conditions,
morbid or healthy, normal or diseased. Yet, as has been said of him
before, no theory of life seemed to him to be of any importance
compared with life itself. He felt keenly conscious of how barren all
intellectual speculation is when separated from action and experiment.
He knew that the senses, no less than the soul, have their spiritual
mysteries to reveal.

And so he would now study perfumes and the secrets of their
manufacture, distilling heavily scented oils and burning odorous gums
from the East. He saw that there was no mood of the mind that had not
its counterpart in the sensuous life, and set himself to discover their
true relations, wondering what there was in frankincense that made one
mystical, and in ambergris that stirred one's passions, and in violets
that woke the memory of dead romances, and in musk that troubled the
brain, and in champak that stained the imagination; and seeking often
to elaborate a real psychology of perfumes, and to estimate the several
influences of sweet-smelling roots and scented, pollen-laden flowers;
of aromatic balms and of dark and fragrant woods; of spikenard, that
sickens; of hovenia, that makes men mad; and of aloes, that are said to
be able to expel melancholy from the soul.

At another time he devoted himself entirely to music, and in a long
latticed room, with a vermilion-and-gold ceiling and walls of
olive-green lacquer, he used to give curious concerts in which mad
gipsies tore wild music from little zithers, or grave, yellow-shawled
Tunisians plucked at the strained strings of monstrous lutes, while
grinning Negroes beat monotonously upon copper drums and, crouching
upon scarlet mats, slim turbaned Indians blew through long pipes of
reed or brass and charmed-or feigned to charm-great hooded snakes and
horrible horned adders. The harsh intervals and shrill discords of
barbaric music stirred him at times when Schubert's grace, and Chopin's
beautiful sorrows, and the mighty harmonies of Beethoven himself, fell
unheeded on his ear. He collected together from all parts of the world
the strangest instruments that could be found, either in the tombs of
dead nations or among the few savage tribes that have survived contact
with Western civilizations, and loved to touch and try them. He had the
mysterious _juruparis_ of the Rio Negro Indians, that women are not
allowed to look at and that even youths may not see till they have been
subjected to fasting and scourging, and the earthen jars of the
Peruvians that have the shrill cries of birds, and flutes of human
bones such as Alfonso de Ovalle heard in Chile, and the sonorous green
jaspers that are found near Cuzco and give forth a note of singular
sweetness. He had painted gourds filled with pebbles that rattled when
they were shaken; the long _clarin_ of the Mexicans, into which the
performer does not blow, but through which he inhales the air; the
harsh _ture_ of the Amazon tribes, that is sounded by the sentinels who
sit all day long in high trees, and can be heard, it is said, at a
distance of three leagues; the _teponaztli_, that has two vibrating
tongues of wood and is beaten with sticks that are smeared with an
elastic gum obtained from the milky juice of plants; the _yotl_-bells
of the Aztecs, that are hung in clusters like grapes; and a huge
cylindrical drum, covered with the skins of great serpents, like the
one that Bernal Diaz saw when he went with Cortes into the Mexican
temple, and of whose doleful sound he has left us so vivid a
description. The fantastic character of these instruments fascinated
him, and he felt a curious delight in the thought that art, like
Nature, has her monsters, things of bestial shape and with hideous
voices. Yet, after some time, he wearied of them, and would sit in his
box at the opera, either alone or with Lord Henry, listening in rapt
pleasure to "Tannhauser" and seeing in the prelude to that great work
of art a presentation of the tragedy of his own soul.

On one occasion he took up the study of jewels, and appeared at a
costume ball as Anne de Joyeuse, Admiral of France, in a dress covered
with five hundred and sixty pearls. This taste enthralled him for
years, and, indeed, may be said never to have left him. He would often
spend a whole day settling and resettling in their cases the various
stones that he had collected, such as the olive-green chrysoberyl that
turns red by lamplight, the cymophane with its wirelike line of silver,
the pistachio-coloured peridot, rose-pink and wine-yellow topazes,
carbuncles of fiery scarlet with tremulous, four-rayed stars, flame-red
cinnamon-stones, orange and violet spinels, and amethysts with their
alternate layers of ruby and sapphire. He loved the red gold of the
sunstone, and the moonstone's pearly whiteness, and the broken rainbow
of the milky opal. He procured from Amsterdam three emeralds of
extraordinary size and richness of colour, and had a turquoise _de la
vieille roche_ that was the envy of all the connoisseurs.

He discovered wonderful stories, also, about jewels. In Alphonso's
Clericalis Disciplina a serpent was mentioned with eyes of real
jacinth, and in the romantic history of Alexander, the Conqueror of
Emathia was said to have found in the vale of Jordan snakes "with
collars of real emeralds growing on their backs." There was a gem in
the brain of the dragon, Philostratus told us, and "by the exhibition
of golden letters and a scarlet robe" the monster could be thrown into
a magical sleep and slain. According to the great alchemist, Pierre de
Boniface, the diamond rendered a man invisible, and the agate of India
made him eloquent. The cornelian appeased anger, and the hyacinth
provoked sleep, and the amethyst drove away the fumes of wine. The
garnet cast out demons, and the hydropicus deprived the moon of her
colour. The selenite waxed and waned with the moon, and the meloceus,
that discovers thieves, could be affected only by the blood of kids.
Leonardus Camillus had seen a white stone taken from the brain of a
newly killed toad, that was a certain antidote against poison. The
bezoar, that was found in the heart of the Arabian deer, was a charm
that could cure the plague. In the nests of Arabian birds was the
aspilates, that, according to Democritus, kept the wearer from any
danger by fire.

The King of Ceilan rode through his city with a large ruby in his hand,
as the ceremony of his coronation. The gates of the palace of John the
Priest were "made of sardius, with the horn of the horned snake
inwrought, so that no man might bring poison within." Over the gable
were "two golden apples, in which were two carbuncles," so that the
gold might shine by day and the carbuncles by night. In Lodge's strange
romance 'A Margarite of America', it was stated that in the chamber of
the queen one could behold "all the chaste ladies of the world,
inchased out of silver, looking through fair mirrours of chrysolites,
carbuncles, sapphires, and greene emeraults." Marco Polo had seen the
inhabitants of Zipangu place rose-coloured pearls in the mouths of the
dead. A sea-monster had been enamoured of the pearl that the diver
brought to King Perozes, and had slain the thief, and mourned for seven
moons over its loss. When the Huns lured the king into the great pit,
he flung it away-Procopius tells the story-nor was it ever found again,
though the Emperor Anastasius offered five hundred-weight of gold
pieces for it. The King of Malabar had shown to a certain Venetian a
rosary of three hundred and four pearls, one for every god that he
worshipped.

When the Duke de Valentinois, son of Alexander VI., visited Louis XII.
of France, his horse was loaded with gold leaves, according to
Brantome, and his cap had double rows of rubies that threw out a great
light. Charles of England had ridden in stirrups hung with four hundred
and twenty-one diamonds. Richard II had a coat, valued at thirty
thousand marks, which was covered with balas rubies. Hall described
Henry VIII., on his way to the Tower previous to his coronation, as
wearing "a jacket of raised gold, the placard embroidered with diamonds
and other rich stones, and a great bauderike about his neck of large
balasses." The favourites of James I wore ear-rings of emeralds set in
gold filigrane. Edward II gave to Piers Gaveston a suit of red-gold
armour studded with jacinths, a collar of gold roses set with
turquoise-stones, and a skull-cap _parsem'e_ with pearls. Henry II. wore
jewelled gloves reaching to the elbow, and had a hawk-glove sewn with
twelve rubies and fifty-two great orients. The ducal hat of Charles the
Rash, the last Duke of Burgundy of his race, was hung with pear-shaped
pearls and studded with sapphires.

How exquisite life had once been! How gorgeous in its pomp and
decoration! Even to read of the luxury of the dead was wonderful.

Then he turned his attention to embroideries and to the tapestries that
performed the office of frescoes in the chill rooms of the northern
nations of Europe. As he investigated the subject-and he always had an
extraordinary faculty of becoming absolutely absorbed for the moment in
whatever he took up-he was almost saddened by the reflection of the
ruin that time brought on beautiful and wonderful things. He, at any
rate, had escaped that. Summer followed summer, and the yellow jonquils
bloomed and died many times, and nights of horror repeated the story of
their shame, but he was unchanged. No winter marred his face or stained
his flowerlike bloom. How different it was with material things! Where
had they passed to? Where was the great crocus-coloured robe, on which
the gods fought against the giants, that had been worked by brown girls
for the pleasure of Athena? Where the huge velarium that Nero had
stretched across the Colosseum at Rome, that Titan sail of purple on
which was represented the starry sky, and Apollo driving a chariot
drawn by white, gilt-reined steeds? He longed to see the curious
table-napkins wrought for the Priest of the Sun, on which were
displayed all the dainties and viands that could be wanted for a feast;
the mortuary cloth of King Chilperic, with its three hundred golden
bees; the fantastic robes that excited the indignation of the Bishop of
Pontus and were figured with "lions, panthers, bears, dogs, forests,
rocks, hunters-all, in fact, that a painter can copy from nature"; and
the coat that Charles of Orleans once wore, on the sleeves of which
were embroidered the verses of a song beginning "_Madame, je suis tout
joyeux_," the musical accompaniment of the words being wrought in gold
thread, and each note, of square shape in those days, formed with four
pearls. He read of the room that was prepared at the palace at Rheims
for the use of Queen Joan of Burgundy and was decorated with "thirteen
hundred and twenty-one parrots, made in broidery, and blazoned with the
king's arms, and five hundred and sixty-one butterflies, whose wings
were similarly ornamented with the arms of the queen, the whole worked
in gold." Catherine de Medicis had a mourning-bed made for her of black
velvet powdered with crescents and suns. Its curtains were of damask,
with leafy wreaths and garlands, figured upon a gold and silver ground,
and fringed along the edges with broideries of pearls, and it stood in
a room hung with rows of the queen's devices in cut black velvet upon
cloth of silver. Louis XIV. had gold embroidered caryatides fifteen
feet high in his apartment. The state bed of Sobieski, King of Poland,
was made of Smyrna gold brocade embroidered in turquoises with verses
from the Koran. Its supports were of silver gilt, beautifully chased,
and profusely set with enamelled and jewelled medallions. It had been
taken from the Turkish camp before Vienna, and the standard of Mohammed
had stood beneath the tremulous gilt of its canopy.

And so, for a whole year, he sought to accumulate the most exquisite
specimens that he could find of textile and embroidered work, getting
the dainty Delhi muslins, finely wrought with gold-thread palmates and
stitched over with iridescent beetles' wings; the Dacca gauzes, that
from their transparency are known in the East as "woven air," and
"running water," and "evening dew"; strange figured cloths from Java;
elaborate yellow Chinese hangings; books bound in tawny satins or fair
blue silks and wrought with _fleurs-de-lis_, birds and images; veils of
_lacis_ worked in Hungary point; Sicilian brocades and stiff Spanish
velvets; Georgian work, with its gilt coins, and Japanese _Foukousas_,
with their green-toned golds and their marvellously plumaged birds.

He had a special passion, also, for ecclesiastical vestments, as indeed
he had for everything connected with the service of the Church. In the
long cedar chests that lined the west gallery of his house, he had
stored away many rare and beautiful specimens of what is really the
raiment of the Bride of Christ, who must wear purple and jewels and
fine linen that she may hide the pallid macerated body that is worn by
the suffering that she seeks for and wounded by self-inflicted pain. He
possessed a gorgeous cope of crimson silk and gold-thread damask,
figured with a repeating pattern of golden pomegranates set in
six-petalled formal blossoms, beyond which on either side was the
pine-apple device wrought in seed-pearls. The orphreys were divided
into panels representing scenes from the life of the Virgin, and the
coronation of the Virgin was figured in coloured silks upon the hood.
This was Italian work of the fifteenth century. Another cope was of
green velvet, embroidered with heart-shaped groups of acanthus-leaves,
from which spread long-stemmed white blossoms, the details of which
were picked out with silver thread and coloured crystals. The morse
bore a seraph's head in gold-thread raised work. The orphreys were
woven in a diaper of red and gold silk, and were starred with
medallions of many saints and martyrs, among whom was St. Sebastian. He
had chasubles, also, of amber-coloured silk, and blue silk and gold
brocade, and yellow silk damask and cloth of gold, figured with
representations of the Passion and Crucifixion of Christ, and
embroidered with lions and peacocks and other emblems; dalmatics of
white satin and pink silk damask, decorated with tulips and dolphins
and _fleurs-de-lis_; altar frontals of crimson velvet and blue linen;
and many corporals, chalice-veils, and sudaria. In the mystic offices
to which such things were put, there was something that quickened his
imagination.

For these treasures, and everything that he collected in his lovely
house, were to be to him means of forgetfulness, modes by which he
could escape, for a season, from the fear that seemed to him at times
to be almost too great to be borne. Upon the walls of the lonely locked
room where he had spent so much of his boyhood, he had hung with his
own hands the terrible portrait whose changing features showed him the
real degradation of his life, and in front of it had draped the
purple-and-gold pall as a curtain. For weeks he would not go there,
would forget the hideous painted thing, and get back his light heart,
his wonderful joyousness, his passionate absorption in mere existence.
Then, suddenly, some night he would creep out of the house, go down to
dreadful places near Blue Gate Fields, and stay there, day after day,
until he was driven away. On his return he would sit in front of the
picture, sometimes loathing it and himself, but filled, at other times,
with that pride of individualism that is half the fascination of sin,
and smiling with secret pleasure at the misshapen shadow that had to
bear the burden that should have been his own.

After a few years he could not endure to be long out of England, and
gave up the villa that he had shared at Trouville with Lord Henry, as
well as the little white walled-in house at Algiers where they had more
than once spent the winter. He hated to be separated from the picture
that was such a part of his life, and was also afraid that during his
absence some one might gain access to the room, in spite of the
elaborate bars that he had caused to be placed upon the door.

He was quite conscious that this would tell them nothing. It was true
that the portrait still preserved, under all the foulness and ugliness
of the face, its marked likeness to himself; but what could they learn
from that? He would laugh at any one who tried to taunt him. He had not
painted it. What was it to him how vile and full of shame it looked?
Even if he told them, would they believe it?

Yet he was afraid. Sometimes when he was down at his great house in
Nottinghamshire, entertaining the fashionable young men of his own rank
who were his chief companions, and astounding the county by the wanton
luxury and gorgeous splendour of his mode of life, he would suddenly
leave his guests and rush back to town to see that the door had not
been tampered with and that the picture was still there. What if it
should be stolen? The mere thought made him cold with horror. Surely
the world would know his secret then. Perhaps the world already
suspected it.

For, while he fascinated many, there were not a few who distrusted him.
He was very nearly blackballed at a West End club of which his birth
and social position fully entitled him to become a member, and it was
said that on one occasion, when he was brought by a friend into the
smoking-room of the Churchill, the Duke of Berwick and another
gentleman got up in a marked manner and went out. Curious stories
became current about him after he had passed his twenty-fifth year. It
was rumoured that he had been seen brawling with foreign sailors in a
low den in the distant parts of Whitechapel, and that he consorted with
thieves and coiners and knew the mysteries of their trade. His
extraordinary absences became notorious, and, when he used to reappear
again in society, men would whisper to each other in corners, or pass
him with a sneer, or look at him with cold searching eyes, as though
they were determined to discover his secret.

Of such insolences and attempted slights he, of course, took no notice,
and in the opinion of most people his frank debonair manner, his
charming boyish smile, and the infinite grace of that wonderful youth
that seemed never to leave him, were in themselves a sufficient answer
to the calumnies, for so they termed them, that were circulated about
him. It was remarked, however, that some of those who had been most
intimate with him appeared, after a time, to shun him. Women who had
wildly adored him, and for his sake had braved all social censure and
set convention at defiance, were seen to grow pallid with shame or
horror if Dorian Gray entered the room.

Yet these whispered scandals only increased in the eyes of many his
strange and dangerous charm. His great wealth was a certain element of
security. Society-civilized society, at least-is never very ready to
believe anything to the detriment of those who are both rich and
fascinating. It feels instinctively that manners are of more importance
than morals, and, in its opinion, the highest respectability is of much
less value than the possession of a good _chef_. And, after all, it is
a very poor consolation to be told that the man who has given one a bad
dinner, or poor wine, is irreproachable in his private life. Even the
cardinal virtues cannot atone for half-cold _entr'ees_, as Lord Henry
remarked once, in a discussion on the subject, and there is possibly a
good deal to be said for his view. For the canons of good society are,
or should be, the same as the canons of art. Form is absolutely
essential to it. It should have the dignity of a ceremony, as well as
its unreality, and should combine the insincere character of a romantic
play with the wit and beauty that make such plays delightful to us. Is
insincerity such a terrible thing? I think not. It is merely a method
by which we can multiply our personalities.

Such, at any rate, was Dorian Gray's opinion. He used to wonder at the
shallow psychology of those who conceive the ego in man as a thing
simple, permanent, reliable, and of one essence. To him, man was a
being with myriad lives and myriad sensations, a complex multiform
creature that bore within itself strange legacies of thought and
passion, and whose very flesh was tainted with the monstrous maladies
of the dead. He loved to stroll through the gaunt cold picture-gallery
of his country house and look at the various portraits of those whose
blood flowed in his veins. Here was Philip Herbert, described by
Francis Osborne, in his Memoires on the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and
King James, as one who was "caressed by the Court for his handsome
face, which kept him not long company." Was it young Herbert's life
that he sometimes led? Had some strange poisonous germ crept from body
to body till it had reached his own? Was it some dim sense of that
ruined grace that had made him so suddenly, and almost without cause,
give utterance, in Basil Hallward's studio, to the mad prayer that had
so changed his life? Here, in gold-embroidered red doublet, jewelled
surcoat, and gilt-edged ruff and wristbands, stood Sir Anthony Sherard,
with his silver-and-black armour piled at his feet. What had this man's
legacy been? Had the lover of Giovanna of Naples bequeathed him some
inheritance of sin and shame? Were his own actions merely the dreams
that the dead man had not dared to realize? Here, from the fading
canvas, smiled Lady Elizabeth Devereux, in her gauze hood, pearl
stomacher, and pink slashed sleeves. A flower was in her right hand,
and her left clasped an enamelled collar of white and damask roses. On
a table by her side lay a mandolin and an apple. There were large green
rosettes upon her little pointed shoes. He knew her life, and the
strange stories that were told about her lovers. Had he something of
her temperament in him? These oval, heavy-lidded eyes seemed to look
curiously at him. What of George Willoughby, with his powdered hair and
fantastic patches? How evil he looked! The face was saturnine and
swarthy, and the sensual lips seemed to be twisted with disdain.
Delicate lace ruffles fell over the lean yellow hands that were so
overladen with rings. He had been a macaroni of the eighteenth century,
and the friend, in his youth, of Lord Ferrars. What of the second Lord
Beckenham, the companion of the Prince Regent in his wildest days, and
one of the witnesses at the secret marriage with Mrs. Fitzherbert? How
proud and handsome he was, with his chestnut curls and insolent pose!
What passions had he bequeathed? The world had looked upon him as
infamous. He had led the orgies at Carlton House. The star of the
Garter glittered upon his breast. Beside him hung the portrait of his
wife, a pallid, thin-lipped woman in black. Her blood, also, stirred
within him. How curious it all seemed! And his mother with her Lady
Hamilton face and her moist, wine-dashed lips-he knew what he had got
from her. He had got from her his beauty, and his passion for the
beauty of others. She laughed at him in her loose Bacchante dress.
There were vine leaves in her hair. The purple spilled from the cup she
was holding. The carnations of the painting had withered, but the eyes
were still wonderful in their depth and brilliancy of colour. They
seemed to follow him wherever he went.

Yet one had ancestors in literature as well as in one's own race,
nearer perhaps in type and temperament, many of them, and certainly
with an influence of which one was more absolutely conscious. There
were times when it appeared to Dorian Gray that the whole of history
was merely the record of his own life, not as he had lived it in act
and circumstance, but as his imagination had created it for him, as it
had been in his brain and in his passions. He felt that he had known
them all, those strange terrible figures that had passed across the
stage of the world and made sin so marvellous and evil so full of
subtlety. It seemed to him that in some mysterious way their lives had
been his own.

The hero of the wonderful novel that had so influenced his life had
himself known this curious fancy. In the seventh chapter he tells how,
crowned with laurel, lest lightning might strike him, he had sat, as
Tiberius, in a garden at Capri, reading the shameful books of
Elephantis, while dwarfs and peacocks strutted round him and the
flute-player mocked the swinger of the censer; and, as Caligula, had
caroused with the green-shirted jockeys in their stables and supped in
an ivory manger with a jewel-frontleted horse; and, as Domitian, had
wandered through a corridor lined with marble mirrors, looking round
with haggard eyes for the reflection of the dagger that was to end his
days, and sick with that ennui, that terrible _taedium vitae_, that comes
on those to whom life denies nothing; and had peered through a clear
emerald at the red shambles of the circus and then, in a litter of
pearl and purple drawn by silver-shod mules, been carried through the
Street of Pomegranates to a House of Gold and heard men cry on Nero
Caesar as he passed by; and, as Elagabalus, had painted his face with
colours, and plied the distaff among the women, and brought the Moon
from Carthage and given her in mystic marriage to the Sun.

Over and over again Dorian used to read this fantastic chapter, and the
two chapters immediately following, in which, as in some curious
tapestries or cunningly wrought enamels, were pictured the awful and
beautiful forms of those whom vice and blood and weariness had made
monstrous or mad: Filippo, Duke of Milan, who slew his wife and painted
her lips with a scarlet poison that her lover might suck death from the
dead thing he fondled; Pietro Barbi, the Venetian, known as Paul the
Second, who sought in his vanity to assume the title of Formosus, and
whose tiara, valued at two hundred thousand florins, was bought at the
price of a terrible sin; Gian Maria Visconti, who used hounds to chase
living men and whose murdered body was covered with roses by a harlot
who had loved him; the Borgia on his white horse, with Fratricide
riding beside him and his mantle stained with the blood of Perotto;
Pietro Riario, the young Cardinal Archbishop of Florence, child and
minion of Sixtus IV., whose beauty was equalled only by his debauchery,
and who received Leonora of Aragon in a pavilion of white and crimson
silk, filled with nymphs and centaurs, and gilded a boy that he might
serve at the feast as Ganymede or Hylas; Ezzelin, whose melancholy
could be cured only by the spectacle of death, and who had a passion
for red blood, as other men have for red wine-the son of the Fiend, as
was reported, and one who had cheated his father at dice when gambling
with him for his own soul; Giambattista Cibo, who in mockery took the
name of Innocent and into whose torpid veins the blood of three lads
was infused by a Jewish doctor; Sigismondo Malatesta, the lover of
Isotta and the lord of Rimini, whose effigy was burned at Rome as the
enemy of God and man, who strangled Polyssena with a napkin, and gave
poison to Ginevra d'Este in a cup of emerald, and in honour of a
shameful passion built a pagan church for Christian worship; Charles
VI., who had so wildly adored his brother's wife that a leper had
warned him of the insanity that was coming on him, and who, when his
brain had sickened and grown strange, could only be soothed by Saracen
cards painted with the images of love and death and madness; and, in
his trimmed jerkin and jewelled cap and acanthuslike curls, Grifonetto
Baglioni, who slew Astorre with his bride, and Simonetto with his page,
and whose comeliness was such that, as he lay dying in the yellow
piazza of Perugia, those who had hated him could not choose but weep,
and Atalanta, who had cursed him, blessed him.

There was a horrible fascination in them all. He saw them at night, and
they troubled his imagination in the day. The Renaissance knew of
strange manners of poisoning-poisoning by a helmet and a lighted torch,
by an embroidered glove and a jewelled fan, by a gilded pomander and by
an amber chain. Dorian Gray had been poisoned by a book. There were
moments when he looked on evil simply as a mode through which he could
realize his conception of the beautiful.




CHAPTER XII.


It was on the ninth of November, the eve of his own thirty-eighth
birthday, as he often remembered afterwards.

He was walking home about eleven o'clock from Lord Henry's, where he
had been dining, and was wrapped in heavy furs, as the night was cold
and foggy. At the corner of Grosvenor Square and South Audley Street, a
man passed him in the mist, walking very fast and with the collar of
his grey ulster turned up. He had a bag in his hand. Dorian recognized
him. It was Basil Hallward. A strange sense of fear, for which he could
not account, came over him. He made no sign of recognition and went on
quickly in the direction of his own house.

But Hallward had seen him. Dorian heard him first stopping on the
pavement and then hurrying after him. In a few moments, his hand was on
his arm.

"Dorian! What an extraordinary piece of luck! I have been waiting for
you in your library ever since nine o'clock. Finally I took pity on
your tired servant and told him to go to bed, as he let me out. I am
off to Paris by the midnight train, and I particularly wanted to see
you before I left. I thought it was you, or rather your fur coat, as
you passed me. But I wasn't quite sure. Didn't you recognize me?"

"In this fog, my dear Basil? Why, I can't even recognize Grosvenor
Square. I believe my house is somewhere about here, but I don't feel at
all certain about it. I am sorry you are going away, as I have not seen
you for ages. But I suppose you will be back soon?"

"No: I am going to be out of England for six months. I intend to take a
studio in Paris and shut myself up till I have finished a great picture
I have in my head. However, it wasn't about myself I wanted to talk.
Here we are at your door. Let me come in for a moment. I have something
to say to you."

"I shall be charmed. But won't you miss your train?" said Dorian Gray
languidly as he passed up the steps and opened the door with his
latch-key.

The lamplight struggled out through the fog, and Hallward looked at his
watch. "I have heaps of time," he answered. "The train doesn't go till
twelve-fifteen, and it is only just eleven. In fact, I was on my way to
the club to look for you, when I met you. You see, I shan't have any
delay about luggage, as I have sent on my heavy things. All I have with
me is in this bag, and I can easily get to Victoria in twenty minutes."

Dorian looked at him and smiled. "What a way for a fashionable painter
to travel! A Gladstone bag and an ulster! Come in, or the fog will get
into the house. And mind you don't talk about anything serious. Nothing
is serious nowadays. At least nothing should be."

Hallward shook his head, as he entered, and followed Dorian into the
library. There was a bright wood fire blazing in the large open hearth.
The lamps were lit, and an open Dutch silver spirit-case stood, with
some siphons of soda-water and large cut-glass tumblers, on a little
marqueterie table.

"You see your servant made me quite at home, Dorian. He gave me
everything I wanted, including your best gold-tipped cigarettes. He is
a most hospitable creature. I like him much better than the Frenchman
you used to have. What has become of the Frenchman, by the bye?"

Dorian shrugged his shoulders. "I believe he married Lady Radley's
maid, and has established her in Paris as an English dressmaker.
_Anglomanie_ is very fashionable over there now, I hear. It seems silly
of the French, doesn't it? But-do you know?-he was not at all a bad
servant. I never liked him, but I had nothing to complain about. One
often imagines things that are quite absurd. He was really very devoted
to me and seemed quite sorry when he went away. Have another
brandy-and-soda? Or would you like hock-and-seltzer? I always take
hock-and-seltzer myself. There is sure to be some in the next room."

"Thanks, I won't have anything more," said the painter, taking his cap
and coat off and throwing them on the bag that he had placed in the
corner. "And now, my dear fellow, I want to speak to you seriously.
Don't frown like that. You make it so much more difficult for me."

"What is it all about?" cried Dorian in his petulant way, flinging
himself down on the sofa. "I hope it is not about myself. I am tired of
myself to-night. I should like to be somebody else."

"It is about yourself," answered Hallward in his grave deep voice, "and
I must say it to you. I shall only keep you half an hour."

Dorian sighed and lit a cigarette. "Half an hour!" he murmured.

"It is not much to ask of you, Dorian, and it is entirely for your own
sake that I am speaking. I think it right that you should know that the
most dreadful things are being said against you in London."

"I don't wish to know anything about them. I love scandals about other
people, but scandals about myself don't interest me. They have not got
the charm of novelty."

"They must interest you, Dorian. Every gentleman is interested in his
good name. You don't want people to talk of you as something vile and
degraded. Of course, you have your position, and your wealth, and all
that kind of thing. But position and wealth are not everything. Mind
you, I don't believe these rumours at all. At least, I can't believe
them when I see you. Sin is a thing that writes itself across a man's
face. It cannot be concealed. People talk sometimes of secret vices.
There are no such things. If a wretched man has a vice, it shows itself
in the lines of his mouth, the droop of his eyelids, the moulding of
his hands even. Somebody-I won't mention his name, but you know
him-came to me last year to have his portrait done. I had never seen
him before, and had never heard anything about him at the time, though
I have heard a good deal since. He offered an extravagant price. I
refused him. There was something in the shape of his fingers that I
hated. I know now that I was quite right in what I fancied about him.
His life is dreadful. But you, Dorian, with your pure, bright, innocent
face, and your marvellous untroubled youth-I can't believe anything
against you. And yet I see you very seldom, and you never come down to
the studio now, and when I am away from you, and I hear all these
hideous things that people are whispering about you, I don't know what
to say. Why is it, Dorian, that a man like the Duke of Berwick leaves
the room of a club when you enter it? Why is it that so many gentlemen
in London will neither go to your house or invite you to theirs? You
used to be a friend of Lord Staveley. I met him at dinner last week.
Your name happened to come up in conversation, in connection with the
miniatures you have lent to the exhibition at the Dudley. Staveley
curled his lip and said that you might have the most artistic tastes,
but that you were a man whom no pure-minded girl should be allowed to
know, and whom no chaste woman should sit in the same room with. I
reminded him that I was a friend of yours, and asked him what he meant.
He told me. He told me right out before everybody. It was horrible! Why
is your friendship so fatal to young men? There was that wretched boy
in the Guards who committed suicide. You were his great friend. There
was Sir Henry Ashton, who had to leave England with a tarnished name.
You and he were inseparable. What about Adrian Singleton and his
dreadful end? What about Lord Kent's only son and his career? I met his
father yesterday in St. James's Street. He seemed broken with shame and
sorrow. What about the young Duke of Perth? What sort of life has he
got now? What gentleman would associate with him?"

"Stop, Basil. You are talking about things of which you know nothing,"
said Dorian Gray, biting his lip, and with a note of infinite contempt
in his voice. "You ask me why Berwick leaves a room when I enter it. It
is because I know everything about his life, not because he knows
anything about mine. With such blood as he has in his veins, how could
his record be clean? You ask me about Henry Ashton and young Perth. Did
I teach the one his vices, and the other his debauchery? If Kent's
silly son takes his wife from the streets, what is that to me? If
Adrian Singleton writes his friend's name across a bill, am I his
keeper? I know how people chatter in England. The middle classes air
their moral prejudices over their gross dinner-tables, and whisper
about what they call the profligacies of their betters in order to try
and pretend that they are in smart society and on intimate terms with
the people they slander. In this country, it is enough for a man to
have distinction and brains for every common tongue to wag against him.
And what sort of lives do these people, who pose as being moral, lead
themselves? My dear fellow, you forget that we are in the native land
of the hypocrite."

"Dorian," cried Hallward, "that is not the question. England is bad
enough I know, and English society is all wrong. That is the reason why
I want you to be fine. You have not been fine. One has a right to judge
of a man by the effect he has over his friends. Yours seem to lose all
sense of honour, of goodness, of purity. You have filled them with a
madness for pleasure. They have gone down into the depths. You led them
there. Yes: you led them there, and yet you can smile, as you are
smiling now. And there is worse behind. I know you and Harry are
inseparable. Surely for that reason, if for none other, you should not
have made his sister's name a by-word."

"Take care, Basil. You go too far."

"I must speak, and you must listen. You shall listen. When you met Lady
Gwendolen, not a breath of scandal had ever touched her. Is there a
single decent woman in London now who would drive with her in the park?
Why, even her children are not allowed to live with her. Then there are
other stories-stories that you have been seen creeping at dawn out of
dreadful houses and slinking in disguise into the foulest dens in
London. Are they true? Can they be true? When I first heard them, I
laughed. I hear them now, and they make me shudder. What about your
country-house and the life that is led there? Dorian, you don't know
what is said about you. I won't tell you that I don't want to preach to
you. I remember Harry saying once that every man who turned himself
into an amateur curate for the moment always began by saying that, and
then proceeded to break his word. I do want to preach to you. I want
you to lead such a life as will make the world respect you. I want you
to have a clean name and a fair record. I want you to get rid of the
dreadful people you associate with. Don't shrug your shoulders like
that. Don't be so indifferent. You have a wonderful influence. Let it
be for good, not for evil. They say that you corrupt every one with
whom you become intimate, and that it is quite sufficient for you to
enter a house for shame of some kind to follow after. I don't know
whether it is so or not. How should I know? But it is said of you. I am
told things that it seems impossible to doubt. Lord Gloucester was one
of my greatest friends at Oxford. He showed me a letter that his wife
had written to him when she was dying alone in her villa at Mentone.
Your name was implicated in the most terrible confession I ever read. I
told him that it was absurd-that I knew you thoroughly and that you
were incapable of anything of the kind. Know you? I wonder do I know
you? Before I could answer that, I should have to see your soul."

"To see my soul!" muttered Dorian Gray, starting up from the sofa and
turning almost white from fear.

"Yes," answered Hallward gravely, and with deep-toned sorrow in his
voice, "to see your soul. But only God can do that."

A bitter laugh of mockery broke from the lips of the younger man. "You
shall see it yourself, to-night!" he cried, seizing a lamp from the
table. "Come: it is your own handiwork. Why shouldn't you look at it?
You can tell the world all about it afterwards, if you choose. Nobody
would believe you. If they did believe you, they would like me all the
better for it. I know the age better than you do, though you will prate
about it so tediously. Come, I tell you. You have chattered enough
about corruption. Now you shall look on it face to face."

There was the madness of pride in every word he uttered. He stamped his
foot upon the ground in his boyish insolent manner. He felt a terrible
joy at the thought that some one else was to share his secret, and that
the man who had painted the portrait that was the origin of all his
shame was to be burdened for the rest of his life with the hideous
memory of what he had done.

"Yes," he continued, coming closer to him and looking steadfastly into
his stern eyes, "I shall show you my soul. You shall see the thing that
you fancy only God can see."

Hallward started back. "This is blasphemy, Dorian!" he cried. "You must
not say things like that. They are horrible, and they don't mean
anything."

"You think so?" He laughed again.

"I know so. As for what I said to you to-night, I said it for your
good. You know I have been always a stanch friend to you."

"Don't touch me. Finish what you have to say."

A twisted flash of pain shot across the painter's face. He paused for a
moment, and a wild feeling of pity came over him. After all, what right
had he to pry into the life of Dorian Gray? If he had done a tithe of
what was rumoured about him, how much he must have suffered! Then he
straightened himself up, and walked over to the fire-place, and stood
there, looking at the burning logs with their frostlike ashes and their
throbbing cores of flame.

"I am waiting, Basil," said the young man in a hard clear voice.

He turned round. "What I have to say is this," he cried. "You must give
me some answer to these horrible charges that are made against you. If
you tell me that they are absolutely untrue from beginning to end, I
shall believe you. Deny them, Dorian, deny them! Can't you see what I
am going through? My God! don't tell me that you are bad, and corrupt,
and shameful."

Dorian Gray smiled. There was a curl of contempt in his lips. "Come
upstairs, Basil," he said quietly. "I keep a diary of my life from day
to day, and it never leaves the room in which it is written. I shall
show it to you if you come with me."

"I shall come with you, Dorian, if you wish it. I see I have missed my
train. That makes no matter. I can go to-morrow. But don't ask me to
read anything to-night. All I want is a plain answer to my question."

"That shall be given to you upstairs. I could not give it here. You
will not have to read long."




CHAPTER XIII.


He passed out of the room and began the ascent, Basil Hallward
following close behind. They walked softly, as men do instinctively at
night. The lamp cast fantastic shadows on the wall and staircase. A
rising wind made some of the windows rattle.

When they reached the top landing, Dorian set the lamp down on the
floor, and taking out the key, turned it in the lock. "You insist on
knowing, Basil?" he asked in a low voice.

"Yes."

"I am delighted," he answered, smiling. Then he added, somewhat
harshly, "You are the one man in the world who is entitled to know
everything about me. You have had more to do with my life than you
think"; and, taking up the lamp, he opened the door and went in. A cold
current of air passed them, and the light shot up for a moment in a
flame of murky orange. He shuddered. "Shut the door behind you," he
whispered, as he placed the lamp on the table.

Hallward glanced round him with a puzzled expression. The room looked
as if it had not been lived in for years. A faded Flemish tapestry, a
curtained picture, an old Italian _cassone_, and an almost empty
book-case-that was all that it seemed to contain, besides a chair and a
table. As Dorian Gray was lighting a half-burned candle that was
standing on the mantelshelf, he saw that the whole place was covered
with dust and that the carpet was in holes. A mouse ran scuffling
behind the wainscoting. There was a damp odour of mildew.

"So you think that it is only God who sees the soul, Basil? Draw that
curtain back, and you will see mine."

The voice that spoke was cold and cruel. "You are mad, Dorian, or
playing a part," muttered Hallward, frowning.

"You won't? Then I must do it myself," said the young man, and he tore
the curtain from its rod and flung it on the ground.

An exclamation of horror broke from the painter's lips as he saw in the
dim light the hideous face on the canvas grinning at him. There was
something in its expression that filled him with disgust and loathing.
Good heavens! it was Dorian Gray's own face that he was looking at! The
horror, whatever it was, had not yet entirely spoiled that marvellous
beauty. There was still some gold in the thinning hair and some scarlet
on the sensual mouth. The sodden eyes had kept something of the
loveliness of their blue, the noble curves had not yet completely
passed away from chiselled nostrils and from plastic throat. Yes, it
was Dorian himself. But who had done it? He seemed to recognize his own
brushwork, and the frame was his own design. The idea was monstrous,
yet he felt afraid. He seized the lighted candle, and held it to the
picture. In the left-hand corner was his own name, traced in long
letters of bright vermilion.

It was some foul parody, some infamous ignoble satire. He had never
done that. Still, it was his own picture. He knew it, and he felt as if
his blood had changed in a moment from fire to sluggish ice. His own
picture! What did it mean? Why had it altered? He turned and looked at
Dorian Gray with the eyes of a sick man. His mouth twitched, and his
parched tongue seemed unable to articulate. He passed his hand across
his forehead. It was dank with clammy sweat.

The young man was leaning against the mantelshelf, watching him with
that strange expression that one sees on the faces of those who are
absorbed in a play when some great artist is acting. There was neither
real sorrow in it nor real joy. There was simply the passion of the
spectator, with perhaps a flicker of triumph in his eyes. He had taken
the flower out of his coat, and was smelling it, or pretending to do
so.

"What does this mean?" cried Hallward, at last. His own voice sounded
shrill and curious in his ears.

"Years ago, when I was a boy," said Dorian Gray, crushing the flower in
his hand, "you met me, flattered me, and taught me to be vain of my
good looks. One day you introduced me to a friend of yours, who
explained to me the wonder of youth, and you finished a portrait of me
that revealed to me the wonder of beauty. In a mad moment that, even
now, I don't know whether I regret or not, I made a wish, perhaps you
would call it a prayer...."

"I remember it! Oh, how well I remember it! No! the thing is
impossible. The room is damp. Mildew has got into the canvas. The
paints I used had some wretched mineral poison in them. I tell you the
thing is impossible."

"Ah, what is impossible?" murmured the young man, going over to the
window and leaning his forehead against the cold, mist-stained glass.

"You told me you had destroyed it."

"I was wrong. It has destroyed me."

"I don't believe it is my picture."

"Can't you see your ideal in it?" said Dorian bitterly.

"My ideal, as you call it..."

"As you called it."

"There was nothing evil in it, nothing shameful. You were to me such an
ideal as I shall never meet again. This is the face of a satyr."

"It is the face of my soul."

"Christ! what a thing I must have worshipped! It has the eyes of a
devil."

"Each of us has heaven and hell in him, Basil," cried Dorian with a
wild gesture of despair.

Hallward turned again to the portrait and gazed at it. "My God! If it
is true," he exclaimed, "and this is what you have done with your life,
why, you must be worse even than those who talk against you fancy you
to be!" He held the light up again to the canvas and examined it. The
surface seemed to be quite undisturbed and as he had left it. It was
from within, apparently, that the foulness and horror had come. Through
some strange quickening of inner life the leprosies of sin were slowly
eating the thing away. The rotting of a corpse in a watery grave was
not so fearful.

His hand shook, and the candle fell from its socket on the floor and
lay there sputtering. He placed his foot on it and put it out. Then he
flung himself into the rickety chair that was standing by the table and
buried his face in his hands.

"Good God, Dorian, what a lesson! What an awful lesson!" There was no
answer, but he could hear the young man sobbing at the window. "Pray,
Dorian, pray," he murmured. "What is it that one was taught to say in
one's boyhood? 'Lead us not into temptation. Forgive us our sins. Wash
away our iniquities.' Let us say that together. The prayer of your
pride has been answered. The prayer of your repentance will be answered
also. I worshipped you too much. I am punished for it. You worshipped
yourself too much. We are both punished."

Dorian Gray turned slowly around and looked at him with tear-dimmed
eyes. "It is too late, Basil," he faltered.

"It is never too late, Dorian. Let us kneel down and try if we cannot
remember a prayer. Isn't there a verse somewhere, 'Though your sins be
as scarlet, yet I will make them as white as snow'?"

"Those words mean nothing to me now."

"Hush! Don't say that. You have done enough evil in your life. My God!
Don't you see that accursed thing leering at us?"

Dorian Gray glanced at the picture, and suddenly an uncontrollable
feeling of hatred for Basil Hallward came over him, as though it had
been suggested to him by the image on the canvas, whispered into his
ear by those grinning lips. The mad passions of a hunted animal stirred
within him, and he loathed the man who was seated at the table, more
than in his whole life he had ever loathed anything. He glanced wildly
around. Something glimmered on the top of the painted chest that faced
him. His eye fell on it. He knew what it was. It was a knife that he
had brought up, some days before, to cut a piece of cord, and had
forgotten to take away with him. He moved slowly towards it, passing
Hallward as he did so. As soon as he got behind him, he seized it and
turned round. Hallward stirred in his chair as if he was going to rise.
He rushed at him and dug the knife into the great vein that is behind
the ear, crushing the man's head down on the table and stabbing again
and again.

There was a stifled groan and the horrible sound of some one choking
with blood. Three times the outstretched arms shot up convulsively,
waving grotesque, stiff-fingered hands in the air. He stabbed him twice
more, but the man did not move. Something began to trickle on the
floor. He waited for a moment, still pressing the head down. Then he
threw the knife on the table, and listened.

He could hear nothing, but the drip, drip on the threadbare carpet. He
opened the door and went out on the landing. The house was absolutely
quiet. No one was about. For a few seconds he stood bending over the
balustrade and peering down into the black seething well of darkness.
Then he took out the key and returned to the room, locking himself in
as he did so.

The thing was still seated in the chair, straining over the table with
bowed head, and humped back, and long fantastic arms. Had it not been
for the red jagged tear in the neck and the clotted black pool that was
slowly widening on the table, one would have said that the man was
simply asleep.

How quickly it had all been done! He felt strangely calm, and walking
over to the window, opened it and stepped out on the balcony. The wind
had blown the fog away, and the sky was like a monstrous peacock's
tail, starred with myriads of golden eyes. He looked down and saw the
policeman going his rounds and flashing the long beam of his lantern on
the doors of the silent houses. The crimson spot of a prowling hansom
gleamed at the corner and then vanished. A woman in a fluttering shawl
was creeping slowly by the railings, staggering as she went. Now and
then she stopped and peered back. Once, she began to sing in a hoarse
voice. The policeman strolled over and said something to her. She
stumbled away, laughing. A bitter blast swept across the square. The
gas-lamps flickered and became blue, and the leafless trees shook their
black iron branches to and fro. He shivered and went back, closing the
window behind him.

Having reached the door, he turned the key and opened it. He did not
even glance at the murdered man. He felt that the secret of the whole
thing was not to realize the situation. The friend who had painted the
fatal portrait to which all his misery had been due had gone out of his
life. That was enough.

Then he remembered the lamp. It was a rather curious one of Moorish
workmanship, made of dull silver inlaid with arabesques of burnished
steel, and studded with coarse turquoises. Perhaps it might be missed
by his servant, and questions would be asked. He hesitated for a
moment, then he turned back and took it from the table. He could not
help seeing the dead thing. How still it was! How horribly white the
long hands looked! It was like a dreadful wax image.

Having locked the door behind him, he crept quietly downstairs. The
woodwork creaked and seemed to cry out as if in pain. He stopped
several times and waited. No: everything was still. It was merely the
sound of his own footsteps.

When he reached the library, he saw the bag and coat in the corner.
They must be hidden away somewhere. He unlocked a secret press that was
in the wainscoting, a press in which he kept his own curious disguises,
and put them into it. He could easily burn them afterwards. Then he
pulled out his watch. It was twenty minutes to two.

He sat down and began to think. Every year-every month, almost-men were
strangled in England for what he had done. There had been a madness of
murder in the air. Some red star had come too close to the earth....
And yet, what evidence was there against him? Basil Hallward had left
the house at eleven. No one had seen him come in again. Most of the
servants were at Selby Royal. His valet had gone to bed.... Paris! Yes.
It was to Paris that Basil had gone, and by the midnight train, as he
had intended. With his curious reserved habits, it would be months
before any suspicions would be roused. Months! Everything could be
destroyed long before then.

A sudden thought struck him. He put on his fur coat and hat and went
out into the hall. There he paused, hearing the slow heavy tread of the
policeman on the pavement outside and seeing the flash of the
bull's-eye reflected in the window. He waited and held his breath.

After a few moments he drew back the latch and slipped out, shutting
the door very gently behind him. Then he began ringing the bell. In
about five minutes his valet appeared, half-dressed and looking very
drowsy.

"I am sorry to have had to wake you up, Francis," he said, stepping in;
"but I had forgotten my latch-key. What time is it?"

"Ten minutes past two, sir," answered the man, looking at the clock and
blinking.

"Ten minutes past two? How horribly late! You must wake me at nine
to-morrow. I have some work to do."

"All right, sir."

"Did any one call this evening?"

"Mr. Hallward, sir. He stayed here till eleven, and then he went away
to catch his train."

"Oh! I am sorry I didn't see him. Did he leave any message?"

"No, sir, except that he would write to you from Paris, if he did not
find you at the club."

"That will do, Francis. Don't forget to call me at nine to-morrow."

"No, sir."

The man shambled down the passage in his slippers.

Dorian Gray threw his hat and coat upon the table and passed into the
library. For a quarter of an hour he walked up and down the room,
biting his lip and thinking. Then he took down the Blue Book from one
of the shelves and began to turn over the leaves. "Alan Campbell, 152,
Hertford Street, Mayfair." Yes; that was the man he wanted.




CHAPTER XIV.


At nine o'clock the next morning his servant came in with a cup of
chocolate on a tray and opened the shutters. Dorian was sleeping quite
peacefully, lying on his right side, with one hand underneath his
cheek. He looked like a boy who had been tired out with play, or study.

The man had to touch him twice on the shoulder before he woke, and as
he opened his eyes a faint smile passed across his lips, as though he
had been lost in some delightful dream. Yet he had not dreamed at all.
His night had been untroubled by any images of pleasure or of pain. But
youth smiles without any reason. It is one of its chiefest charms.

He turned round, and leaning upon his elbow, began to sip his
chocolate. The mellow November sun came streaming into the room. The
sky was bright, and there was a genial warmth in the air. It was almost
like a morning in May.

Gradually the events of the preceding night crept with silent,
blood-stained feet into his brain and reconstructed themselves there
with terrible distinctness. He winced at the memory of all that he had
suffered, and for a moment the same curious feeling of loathing for
Basil Hallward that had made him kill him as he sat in the chair came
back to him, and he grew cold with passion. The dead man was still
sitting there, too, and in the sunlight now. How horrible that was!
Such hideous things were for the darkness, not for the day.

He felt that if he brooded on what he had gone through he would sicken
or grow mad. There were sins whose fascination was more in the memory
than in the doing of them, strange triumphs that gratified the pride
more than the passions, and gave to the intellect a quickened sense of
joy, greater than any joy they brought, or could ever bring, to the
senses. But this was not one of them. It was a thing to be driven out
of the mind, to be drugged with poppies, to be strangled lest it might
strangle one itself.

When the half-hour struck, he passed his hand across his forehead, and
then got up hastily and dressed himself with even more than his usual
care, giving a good deal of attention to the choice of his necktie and
scarf-pin and changing his rings more than once. He spent a long time
also over breakfast, tasting the various dishes, talking to his valet
about some new liveries that he was thinking of getting made for the
servants at Selby, and going through his correspondence. At some of the
letters, he smiled. Three of them bored him. One he read several times
over and then tore up with a slight look of annoyance in his face.
"That awful thing, a woman's memory!" as Lord Henry had once said.

After he had drunk his cup of black coffee, he wiped his lips slowly
with a napkin, motioned to his servant to wait, and going over to the
table, sat down and wrote two letters. One he put in his pocket, the
other he handed to the valet.

"Take this round to 152, Hertford Street, Francis, and if Mr. Campbell
is out of town, get his address."

As soon as he was alone, he lit a cigarette and began sketching upon a
piece of paper, drawing first flowers and bits of architecture, and
then human faces. Suddenly he remarked that every face that he drew
seemed to have a fantastic likeness to Basil Hallward. He frowned, and
getting up, went over to the book-case and took out a volume at hazard.
He was determined that he would not think about what had happened until
it became absolutely necessary that he should do so.

When he had stretched himself on the sofa, he looked at the title-page
of the book. It was Gautier's "'Emaux et Cam'ees", Charpentier's
Japanese-paper edition, with the Jacquemart etching. The binding was of
citron-green leather, with a design of gilt trellis-work and dotted
pomegranates. It had been given to him by Adrian Singleton. As he
turned over the pages, his eye fell on the poem about the hand of
Lacenaire, the cold yellow hand "_du supplice encore mal lav'ee_," with
its downy red hairs and its "_doigts de faune_." He glanced at his own
white taper fingers, shuddering slightly in spite of himself, and
passed on, till he came to those lovely stanzas upon Venice:

Sur une gamme chromatique,
    Le sein de perles ruisselant,
La V'enus de l'Adriatique
    Sort de l'eau son corps rose et blanc.

Les d^omes, sur l'azur des ondes
    Suivant la phrase au pur contour,
S'enflent comme des gorges rondes
    Que soul`eve un soupir d'amour.

L'esquif aborde et me d'epose,
    Jetant son amarre au pilier,
Devant une facade rose,
    Sur le marbre d'un escalier.


How exquisite they were! As one read them, one seemed to be floating
down the green water-ways of the pink and pearl city, seated in a black
gondola with silver prow and trailing curtains. The mere lines looked
to him like those straight lines of turquoise-blue that follow one as
one pushes out to the Lido. The sudden flashes of colour reminded him
of the gleam of the opal-and-iris-throated birds that flutter round the
tall honeycombed Campanile, or stalk, with such stately grace, through
the dim, dust-stained arcades. Leaning back with half-closed eyes, he
kept saying over and over to himself:

"Devant une facade rose,
Sur le marbre d'un escalier."


The whole of Venice was in those two lines. He remembered the autumn
that he had passed there, and a wonderful love that had stirred him to
mad delightful follies. There was romance in every place. But Venice,
like Oxford, had kept the background for romance, and, to the true
romantic, background was everything, or almost everything. Basil had
been with him part of the time, and had gone wild over Tintoret. Poor
Basil! What a horrible way for a man to die!

He sighed, and took up the volume again, and tried to forget. He read
of the swallows that fly in and out of the little _caf'e_ at Smyrna
where the Hadjis sit counting their amber beads and the turbaned
merchants smoke their long tasselled pipes and talk gravely to each
other; he read of the Obelisk in the Place de la Concorde that weeps
tears of granite in its lonely sunless exile and longs to be back by
the hot, lotus-covered Nile, where there are Sphinxes, and rose-red
ibises, and white vultures with gilded claws, and crocodiles with small
beryl eyes that crawl over the green steaming mud; he began to brood
over those verses which, drawing music from kiss-stained marble, tell
of that curious statue that Gautier compares to a contralto voice, the
"_monstre charmant_" that couches in the porphyry-room of the Louvre.
But after a time the book fell from his hand. He grew nervous, and a
horrible fit of terror came over him. What if Alan Campbell should be
out of England? Days would elapse before he could come back. Perhaps he
might refuse to come. What could he do then? Every moment was of vital
importance.

They had been great friends once, five years before-almost inseparable,
indeed. Then the intimacy had come suddenly to an end. When they met in
society now, it was only Dorian Gray who smiled: Alan Campbell never
did.

He was an extremely clever young man, though he had no real
appreciation of the visible arts, and whatever little sense of the
beauty of poetry he possessed he had gained entirely from Dorian. His
dominant intellectual passion was for science. At Cambridge he had
spent a great deal of his time working in the laboratory, and had taken
a good class in the Natural Science Tripos of his year. Indeed, he was
still devoted to the study of chemistry, and had a laboratory of his
own in which he used to shut himself up all day long, greatly to the
annoyance of his mother, who had set her heart on his standing for
Parliament and had a vague idea that a chemist was a person who made up
prescriptions. He was an excellent musician, however, as well, and
played both the violin and the piano better than most amateurs. In
fact, it was music that had first brought him and Dorian Gray
together-music and that indefinable attraction that Dorian seemed to be
able to exercise whenever he wished-and, indeed, exercised often
without being conscious of it. They had met at Lady Berkshire's the
night that Rubinstein played there, and after that used to be always
seen together at the opera and wherever good music was going on. For
eighteen months their intimacy lasted. Campbell was always either at
Selby Royal or in Grosvenor Square. To him, as to many others, Dorian
Gray was the type of everything that is wonderful and fascinating in
life. Whether or not a quarrel had taken place between them no one ever
knew. But suddenly people remarked that they scarcely spoke when they
met and that Campbell seemed always to go away early from any party at
which Dorian Gray was present. He had changed, too-was strangely
melancholy at times, appeared almost to dislike hearing music, and
would never himself play, giving as his excuse, when he was called
upon, that he was so absorbed in science that he had no time left in
which to practise. And this was certainly true. Every day he seemed to
become more interested in biology, and his name appeared once or twice
in some of the scientific reviews in connection with certain curious
experiments.

This was the man Dorian Gray was waiting for. Every second he kept
glancing at the clock. As the minutes went by he became horribly
agitated. At last he got up and began to pace up and down the room,
looking like a beautiful caged thing. He took long stealthy strides.
His hands were curiously cold.

The suspense became unbearable. Time seemed to him to be crawling with
feet of lead, while he by monstrous winds was being swept towards the
jagged edge of some black cleft of precipice. He knew what was waiting
for him there; saw it, indeed, and, shuddering, crushed with dank hands
his burning lids as though he would have robbed the very brain of sight
and driven the eyeballs back into their cave. It was useless. The brain
had its own food on which it battened, and the imagination, made
grotesque by terror, twisted and distorted as a living thing by pain,
danced like some foul puppet on a stand and grinned through moving
masks. Then, suddenly, time stopped for him. Yes: that blind,
slow-breathing thing crawled no more, and horrible thoughts, time being
dead, raced nimbly on in front, and dragged a hideous future from its
grave, and showed it to him. He stared at it. Its very horror made him
stone.

At last the door opened and his servant entered. He turned glazed eyes
upon him.

"Mr. Campbell, sir," said the man.

A sigh of relief broke from his parched lips, and the colour came back
to his cheeks.

"Ask him to come in at once, Francis." He felt that he was himself
again. His mood of cowardice had passed away.

The man bowed and retired. In a few moments, Alan Campbell walked in,
looking very stern and rather pale, his pallor being intensified by his
coal-black hair and dark eyebrows.

"Alan! This is kind of you. I thank you for coming."

"I had intended never to enter your house again, Gray. But you said it
was a matter of life and death." His voice was hard and cold. He spoke
with slow deliberation. There was a look of contempt in the steady
searching gaze that he turned on Dorian. He kept his hands in the
pockets of his Astrakhan coat, and seemed not to have noticed the
gesture with which he had been greeted.

"Yes: it is a matter of life and death, Alan, and to more than one
person. Sit down."

Campbell took a chair by the table, and Dorian sat opposite to him. The
two men's eyes met. In Dorian's there was infinite pity. He knew that
what he was going to do was dreadful.

After a strained moment of silence, he leaned across and said, very
quietly, but watching the effect of each word upon the face of him he
had sent for, "Alan, in a locked room at the top of this house, a room
to which nobody but myself has access, a dead man is seated at a table.
He has been dead ten hours now. Don't stir, and don't look at me like
that. Who the man is, why he died, how he died, are matters that do not
concern you. What you have to do is this-"

"Stop, Gray. I don't want to know anything further. Whether what you
have told me is true or not true doesn't concern me. I entirely decline
to be mixed up in your life. Keep your horrible secrets to yourself.
They don't interest me any more."

"Alan, they will have to interest you. This one will have to interest
you. I am awfully sorry for you, Alan. But I can't help myself. You are
the one man who is able to save me. I am forced to bring you into the
matter. I have no option. Alan, you are scientific. You know about
chemistry and things of that kind. You have made experiments. What you
have got to do is to destroy the thing that is upstairs-to destroy it
so that not a vestige of it will be left. Nobody saw this person come
into the house. Indeed, at the present moment he is supposed to be in
Paris. He will not be missed for months. When he is missed, there must
be no trace of him found here. You, Alan, you must change him, and
everything that belongs to him, into a handful of ashes that I may
scatter in the air."

"You are mad, Dorian."

"Ah! I was waiting for you to call me Dorian."

"You are mad, I tell you-mad to imagine that I would raise a finger to
help you, mad to make this monstrous confession. I will have nothing to
do with this matter, whatever it is. Do you think I am going to peril
my reputation for you? What is it to me what devil's work you are up
to?"

"It was suicide, Alan."

"I am glad of that. But who drove him to it? You, I should fancy."

"Do you still refuse to do this for me?"

"Of course I refuse. I will have absolutely nothing to do with it. I
don't care what shame comes on you. You deserve it all. I should not be
sorry to see you disgraced, publicly disgraced. How dare you ask me, of
all men in the world, to mix myself up in this horror? I should have
thought you knew more about people's characters. Your friend Lord Henry
Wotton can't have taught you much about psychology, whatever else he
has taught you. Nothing will induce me to stir a step to help you. You
have come to the wrong man. Go to some of your friends. Don't come to
me."

"Alan, it was murder. I killed him. You don't know what he had made me
suffer. Whatever my life is, he had more to do with the making or the
marring of it than poor Harry has had. He may not have intended it, the
result was the same."

"Murder! Good God, Dorian, is that what you have come to? I shall not
inform upon you. It is not my business. Besides, without my stirring in
the matter, you are certain to be arrested. Nobody ever commits a crime
without doing something stupid. But I will have nothing to do with it."

"You must have something to do with it. Wait, wait a moment; listen to
me. Only listen, Alan. All I ask of you is to perform a certain
scientific experiment. You go to hospitals and dead-houses, and the
horrors that you do there don't affect you. If in some hideous
dissecting-room or fetid laboratory you found this man lying on a
leaden table with red gutters scooped out in it for the blood to flow
through, you would simply look upon him as an admirable subject. You
would not turn a hair. You would not believe that you were doing
anything wrong. On the contrary, you would probably feel that you were
benefiting the human race, or increasing the sum of knowledge in the
world, or gratifying intellectual curiosity, or something of that kind.
What I want you to do is merely what you have often done before.
Indeed, to destroy a body must be far less horrible than what you are
accustomed to work at. And, remember, it is the only piece of evidence
against me. If it is discovered, I am lost; and it is sure to be
discovered unless you help me."

"I have no desire to help you. You forget that. I am simply indifferent
to the whole thing. It has nothing to do with me."

"Alan, I entreat you. Think of the position I am in. Just before you
came I almost fainted with terror. You may know terror yourself some
day. No! don't think of that. Look at the matter purely from the
scientific point of view. You don't inquire where the dead things on
which you experiment come from. Don't inquire now. I have told you too
much as it is. But I beg of you to do this. We were friends once,
Alan."

"Don't speak about those days, Dorian-they are dead."

"The dead linger sometimes. The man upstairs will not go away. He is
sitting at the table with bowed head and outstretched arms. Alan! Alan!
If you don't come to my assistance, I am ruined. Why, they will hang
me, Alan! Don't you understand? They will hang me for what I have
done."

"There is no good in prolonging this scene. I absolutely refuse to do
anything in the matter. It is insane of you to ask me."

"You refuse?"

"Yes."

"I entreat you, Alan."

"It is useless."

The same look of pity came into Dorian Gray's eyes. Then he stretched
out his hand, took a piece of paper, and wrote something on it. He read
it over twice, folded it carefully, and pushed it across the table.
Having done this, he got up and went over to the window.

Campbell looked at him in surprise, and then took up the paper, and
opened it. As he read it, his face became ghastly pale and he fell back
in his chair. A horrible sense of sickness came over him. He felt as if
his heart was beating itself to death in some empty hollow.

After two or three minutes of terrible silence, Dorian turned round and
came and stood behind him, putting his hand upon his shoulder.

"I am so sorry for you, Alan," he murmured, "but you leave me no
alternative. I have a letter written already. Here it is. You see the
address. If you don't help me, I must send it. If you don't help me, I
will send it. You know what the result will be. But you are going to
help me. It is impossible for you to refuse now. I tried to spare you.
You will do me the justice to admit that. You were stern, harsh,
offensive. You treated me as no man has ever dared to treat me-no
living man, at any rate. I bore it all. Now it is for me to dictate
terms."

Campbell buried his face in his hands, and a shudder passed through
him.

"Yes, it is my turn to dictate terms, Alan. You know what they are. The
thing is quite simple. Come, don't work yourself into this fever. The
thing has to be done. Face it, and do it."

A groan broke from Campbell's lips and he shivered all over. The
ticking of the clock on the mantelpiece seemed to him to be dividing
time into separate atoms of agony, each of which was too terrible to be
borne. He felt as if an iron ring was being slowly tightened round his
forehead, as if the disgrace with which he was threatened had already
come upon him. The hand upon his shoulder weighed like a hand of lead.
It was intolerable. It seemed to crush him.

"Come, Alan, you must decide at once."

"I cannot do it," he said, mechanically, as though words could alter
things.

"You must. You have no choice. Don't delay."

He hesitated a moment. "Is there a fire in the room upstairs?"

"Yes, there is a gas-fire with asbestos."

"I shall have to go home and get some things from the laboratory."

"No, Alan, you must not leave the house. Write out on a sheet of
notepaper what you want and my servant will take a cab and bring the
things back to you."

Campbell scrawled a few lines, blotted them, and addressed an envelope
to his assistant. Dorian took the note up and read it carefully. Then
he rang the bell and gave it to his valet, with orders to return as
soon as possible and to bring the things with him.

As the hall door shut, Campbell started nervously, and having got up
from the chair, went over to the chimney-piece. He was shivering with a
kind of ague. For nearly twenty minutes, neither of the men spoke. A
fly buzzed noisily about the room, and the ticking of the clock was
like the beat of a hammer.

As the chime struck one, Campbell turned round, and looking at Dorian
Gray, saw that his eyes were filled with tears. There was something in
the purity and refinement of that sad face that seemed to enrage him.
"You are infamous, absolutely infamous!" he muttered.

"Hush, Alan. You have saved my life," said Dorian.

"Your life? Good heavens! what a life that is! You have gone from
corruption to corruption, and now you have culminated in crime. In
doing what I am going to do-what you force me to do-it is not of your
life that I am thinking."

"Ah, Alan," murmured Dorian with a sigh, "I wish you had a thousandth
part of the pity for me that I have for you." He turned away as he
spoke and stood looking out at the garden. Campbell made no answer.

After about ten minutes a knock came to the door, and the servant
entered, carrying a large mahogany chest of chemicals, with a long coil
of steel and platinum wire and two rather curiously shaped iron clamps.

"Shall I leave the things here, sir?" he asked Campbell.

"Yes," said Dorian. "And I am afraid, Francis, that I have another
errand for you. What is the name of the man at Richmond who supplies
Selby with orchids?"

"Harden, sir."

"Yes-Harden. You must go down to Richmond at once, see Harden
personally, and tell him to send twice as many orchids as I ordered,
and to have as few white ones as possible. In fact, I don't want any
white ones. It is a lovely day, Francis, and Richmond is a very pretty
place-otherwise I wouldn't bother you about it."

"No trouble, sir. At what time shall I be back?"

Dorian looked at Campbell. "How long will your experiment take, Alan?"
he said in a calm indifferent voice. The presence of a third person in
the room seemed to give him extraordinary courage.

Campbell frowned and bit his lip. "It will take about five hours," he
answered.

"It will be time enough, then, if you are back at half-past seven,
Francis. Or stay: just leave my things out for dressing. You can have
the evening to yourself. I am not dining at home, so I shall not want
you."

"Thank you, sir," said the man, leaving the room.

"Now, Alan, there is not a moment to be lost. How heavy this chest is!
I'll take it for you. You bring the other things." He spoke rapidly and
in an authoritative manner. Campbell felt dominated by him. They left
the room together.

When they reached the top landing, Dorian took out the key and turned
it in the lock. Then he stopped, and a troubled look came into his
eyes. He shuddered. "I don't think I can go in, Alan," he murmured.

"It is nothing to me. I don't require you," said Campbell coldly.

Dorian half opened the door. As he did so, he saw the face of his
portrait leering in the sunlight. On the floor in front of it the torn
curtain was lying. He remembered that the night before he had
forgotten, for the first time in his life, to hide the fatal canvas,
and was about to rush forward, when he drew back with a shudder.

What was that loathsome red dew that gleamed, wet and glistening, on
one of the hands, as though the canvas had sweated blood? How horrible
it was!-more horrible, it seemed to him for the moment, than the silent
thing that he knew was stretched across the table, the thing whose
grotesque misshapen shadow on the spotted carpet showed him that it had
not stirred, but was still there, as he had left it.

He heaved a deep breath, opened the door a little wider, and with
half-closed eyes and averted head, walked quickly in, determined that
he would not look even once upon the dead man. Then, stooping down and
taking up the gold-and-purple hanging, he flung it right over the
picture.

There he stopped, feeling afraid to turn round, and his eyes fixed
themselves on the intricacies of the pattern before him. He heard
Campbell bringing in the heavy chest, and the irons, and the other
things that he had required for his dreadful work. He began to wonder
if he and Basil Hallward had ever met, and, if so, what they had
thought of each other.

"Leave me now," said a stern voice behind him.

He turned and hurried out, just conscious that the dead man had been
thrust back into the chair and that Campbell was gazing into a
glistening yellow face. As he was going downstairs, he heard the key
being turned in the lock.

It was long after seven when Campbell came back into the library. He
was pale, but absolutely calm. "I have done what you asked me to do,"
he muttered. "And now, good-bye. Let us never see each other again."

"You have saved me from ruin, Alan. I cannot forget that," said Dorian
simply.

As soon as Campbell had left, he went upstairs. There was a horrible
smell of nitric acid in the room. But the thing that had been sitting
at the table was gone.




CHAPTER XV.


That evening, at eight-thirty, exquisitely dressed and wearing a large
button-hole of Parma violets, Dorian Gray was ushered into Lady
Narborough's drawing-room by bowing servants. His forehead was
throbbing with maddened nerves, and he felt wildly excited, but his
manner as he bent over his hostess's hand was as easy and graceful as
ever. Perhaps one never seems so much at one's ease as when one has to
play a part. Certainly no one looking at Dorian Gray that night could
have believed that he had passed through a tragedy as horrible as any
tragedy of our age. Those finely shaped fingers could never have
clutched a knife for sin, nor those smiling lips have cried out on God
and goodness. He himself could not help wondering at the calm of his
demeanour, and for a moment felt keenly the terrible pleasure of a
double life.

It was a small party, got up rather in a hurry by Lady Narborough, who
was a very clever woman with what Lord Henry used to describe as the
remains of really remarkable ugliness. She had proved an excellent wife
to one of our most tedious ambassadors, and having buried her husband
properly in a marble mausoleum, which she had herself designed, and
married off her daughters to some rich, rather elderly men, she devoted
herself now to the pleasures of French fiction, French cookery, and
French _esprit_ when she could get it.

Dorian was one of her especial favourites, and she always told him that
she was extremely glad she had not met him in early life. "I know, my
dear, I should have fallen madly in love with you," she used to say,
"and thrown my bonnet right over the mills for your sake. It is most
fortunate that you were not thought of at the time. As it was, our
bonnets were so unbecoming, and the mills were so occupied in trying to
raise the wind, that I never had even a flirtation with anybody.
However, that was all Narborough's fault. He was dreadfully
short-sighted, and there is no pleasure in taking in a husband who
never sees anything."

Her guests this evening were rather tedious. The fact was, as she
explained to Dorian, behind a very shabby fan, one of her married
daughters had come up quite suddenly to stay with her, and, to make
matters worse, had actually brought her husband with her. "I think it
is most unkind of her, my dear," she whispered. "Of course I go and
stay with them every summer after I come from Homburg, but then an old
woman like me must have fresh air sometimes, and besides, I really wake
them up. You don't know what an existence they lead down there. It is
pure unadulterated country life. They get up early, because they have
so much to do, and go to bed early, because they have so little to
think about. There has not been a scandal in the neighbourhood since
the time of Queen Elizabeth, and consequently they all fall asleep
after dinner. You shan't sit next either of them. You shall sit by me
and amuse me."

Dorian murmured a graceful compliment and looked round the room. Yes:
it was certainly a tedious party. Two of the people he had never seen
before, and the others consisted of Ernest Harrowden, one of those
middle-aged mediocrities so common in London clubs who have no enemies,
but are thoroughly disliked by their friends; Lady Ruxton, an
overdressed woman of forty-seven, with a hooked nose, who was always
trying to get herself compromised, but was so peculiarly plain that to
her great disappointment no one would ever believe anything against
her; Mrs. Erlynne, a pushing nobody, with a delightful lisp and
Venetian-red hair; Lady Alice Chapman, his hostess's daughter, a dowdy
dull girl, with one of those characteristic British faces that, once
seen, are never remembered; and her husband, a red-cheeked,
white-whiskered creature who, like so many of his class, was under the
impression that inordinate joviality can atone for an entire lack of
ideas.

He was rather sorry he had come, till Lady Narborough, looking at the
great ormolu gilt clock that sprawled in gaudy curves on the
mauve-draped mantelshelf, exclaimed: "How horrid of Henry Wotton to be
so late! I sent round to him this morning on chance and he promised
faithfully not to disappoint me."

It was some consolation that Harry was to be there, and when the door
opened and he heard his slow musical voice lending charm to some
insincere apology, he ceased to feel bored.

But at dinner he could not eat anything. Plate after plate went away
untasted. Lady Narborough kept scolding him for what she called "an
insult to poor Adolphe, who invented the _menu_ specially for you," and
now and then Lord Henry looked across at him, wondering at his silence
and abstracted manner. From time to time the butler filled his glass
with champagne. He drank eagerly, and his thirst seemed to increase.

"Dorian," said Lord Henry at last, as the _chaud-froid_ was being
handed round, "what is the matter with you to-night? You are quite out
of sorts."

"I believe he is in love," cried Lady Narborough, "and that he is
afraid to tell me for fear I should be jealous. He is quite right. I
certainly should."

"Dear Lady Narborough," murmured Dorian, smiling, "I have not been in
love for a whole week-not, in fact, since Madame de Ferrol left town."

"How you men can fall in love with that woman!" exclaimed the old lady.
"I really cannot understand it."

"It is simply because she remembers you when you were a little girl,
Lady Narborough," said Lord Henry. "She is the one link between us and
your short frocks."

"She does not remember my short frocks at all, Lord Henry. But I
remember her very well at Vienna thirty years ago, and how _d'ecollet'ee_
she was then."

"She is still _d'ecollet'ee_," he answered, taking an olive in his long
fingers; "and when she is in a very smart gown she looks like an
_'edition de luxe_ of a bad French novel. She is really wonderful, and
full of surprises. Her capacity for family affection is extraordinary.
When her third husband died, her hair turned quite gold from grief."

"How can you, Harry!" cried Dorian.

"It is a most romantic explanation," laughed the hostess. "But her
third husband, Lord Henry! You don't mean to say Ferrol is the fourth?"

"Certainly, Lady Narborough."

"I don't believe a word of it."

"Well, ask Mr. Gray. He is one of her most intimate friends."

"Is it true, Mr. Gray?"

"She assures me so, Lady Narborough," said Dorian. "I asked her
whether, like Marguerite de Navarre, she had their hearts embalmed and
hung at her girdle. She told me she didn't, because none of them had
had any hearts at all."

"Four husbands! Upon my word that is _trop de z^ele_."

"_Trop d'audace_, I tell her," said Dorian.

"Oh! she is audacious enough for anything, my dear. And what is Ferrol
like? I don't know him."

"The husbands of very beautiful women belong to the criminal classes,"
said Lord Henry, sipping his wine.

Lady Narborough hit him with her fan. "Lord Henry, I am not at all
surprised that the world says that you are extremely wicked."

"But what world says that?" asked Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows.
"It can only be the next world. This world and I are on excellent
terms."

"Everybody I know says you are very wicked," cried the old lady,
shaking her head.

Lord Henry looked serious for some moments. "It is perfectly
monstrous," he said, at last, "the way people go about nowadays saying
things against one behind one's back that are absolutely and entirely
true."

"Isn't he incorrigible?" cried Dorian, leaning forward in his chair.

"I hope so," said his hostess, laughing. "But really, if you all
worship Madame de Ferrol in this ridiculous way, I shall have to marry
again so as to be in the fashion."

"You will never marry again, Lady Narborough," broke in Lord Henry.
"You were far too happy. When a woman marries again, it is because she
detested her first husband. When a man marries again, it is because he
adored his first wife. Women try their luck; men risk theirs."

"Narborough wasn't perfect," cried the old lady.

"If he had been, you would not have loved him, my dear lady," was the
rejoinder. "Women love us for our defects. If we have enough of them,
they will forgive us everything, even our intellects. You will never
ask me to dinner again after saying this, I am afraid, Lady Narborough,
but it is quite true."

"Of course it is true, Lord Henry. If we women did not love you for
your defects, where would you all be? Not one of you would ever be
married. You would be a set of unfortunate bachelors. Not, however,
that that would alter you much. Nowadays all the married men live like
bachelors, and all the bachelors like married men."

"_Fin de si^ecle_," murmured Lord Henry.

"_Fin du globe_," answered his hostess.

"I wish it were _fin du globe_," said Dorian with a sigh. "Life is a
great disappointment."

"Ah, my dear," cried Lady Narborough, putting on her gloves, "don't
tell me that you have exhausted life. When a man says that one knows
that life has exhausted him. Lord Henry is very wicked, and I sometimes
wish that I had been; but you are made to be good-you look so good. I
must find you a nice wife. Lord Henry, don't you think that Mr. Gray
should get married?"

"I am always telling him so, Lady Narborough," said Lord Henry with a
bow.

"Well, we must look out for a suitable match for him. I shall go
through Debrett carefully to-night and draw out a list of all the
eligible young ladies."

"With their ages, Lady Narborough?" asked Dorian.

"Of course, with their ages, slightly edited. But nothing must be done
in a hurry. I want it to be what _The Morning Post_ calls a suitable
alliance, and I want you both to be happy."

"What nonsense people talk about happy marriages!" exclaimed Lord
Henry. "A man can be happy with any woman, as long as he does not love
her."

"Ah! what a cynic you are!" cried the old lady, pushing back her chair
and nodding to Lady Ruxton. "You must come and dine with me soon again.
You are really an admirable tonic, much better than what Sir Andrew
prescribes for me. You must tell me what people you would like to meet,
though. I want it to be a delightful gathering."

"I like men who have a future and women who have a past," he answered.
"Or do you think that would make it a petticoat party?"

"I fear so," she said, laughing, as she stood up. "A thousand pardons,
my dear Lady Ruxton," she added, "I didn't see you hadn't finished your
cigarette."

"Never mind, Lady Narborough. I smoke a great deal too much. I am going
to limit myself, for the future."

"Pray don't, Lady Ruxton," said Lord Henry. "Moderation is a fatal
thing. Enough is as bad as a meal. More than enough is as good as a
feast."

Lady Ruxton glanced at him curiously. "You must come and explain that
to me some afternoon, Lord Henry. It sounds a fascinating theory," she
murmured, as she swept out of the room.

"Now, mind you don't stay too long over your politics and scandal,"
cried Lady Narborough from the door. "If you do, we are sure to
squabble upstairs."

The men laughed, and Mr. Chapman got up solemnly from the foot of the
table and came up to the top. Dorian Gray changed his seat and went and
sat by Lord Henry. Mr. Chapman began to talk in a loud voice about the
situation in the House of Commons. He guffawed at his adversaries. The
word _doctrinaire_-word full of terror to the British mind-reappeared
from time to time between his explosions. An alliterative prefix served
as an ornament of oratory. He hoisted the Union Jack on the pinnacles
of thought. The inherited stupidity of the race-sound English common
sense he jovially termed it-was shown to be the proper bulwark for
society.

A smile curved Lord Henry's lips, and he turned round and looked at
Dorian.

"Are you better, my dear fellow?" he asked. "You seemed rather out of
sorts at dinner."

"I am quite well, Harry. I am tired. That is all."

"You were charming last night. The little duchess is quite devoted to
you. She tells me she is going down to Selby."

"She has promised to come on the twentieth."

"Is Monmouth to be there, too?"

"Oh, yes, Harry."

"He bores me dreadfully, almost as much as he bores her. She is very
clever, too clever for a woman. She lacks the indefinable charm of
weakness. It is the feet of clay that make the gold of the image
precious. Her feet are very pretty, but they are not feet of clay.
White porcelain feet, if you like. They have been through the fire, and
what fire does not destroy, it hardens. She has had experiences."

"How long has she been married?" asked Dorian.

"An eternity, she tells me. I believe, according to the peerage, it is
ten years, but ten years with Monmouth must have been like eternity,
with time thrown in. Who else is coming?"

"Oh, the Willoughbys, Lord Rugby and his wife, our hostess, Geoffrey
Clouston, the usual set. I have asked Lord Grotrian."

"I like him," said Lord Henry. "A great many people don't, but I find
him charming. He atones for being occasionally somewhat overdressed by
being always absolutely over-educated. He is a very modern type."

"I don't know if he will be able to come, Harry. He may have to go to
Monte Carlo with his father."

"Ah! what a nuisance people's people are! Try and make him come. By the
way, Dorian, you ran off very early last night. You left before eleven.
What did you do afterwards? Did you go straight home?"

Dorian glanced at him hurriedly and frowned.

"No, Harry," he said at last, "I did not get home till nearly three."

"Did you go to the club?"

"Yes," he answered. Then he bit his lip. "No, I don't mean that. I
didn't go to the club. I walked about. I forget what I did.... How
inquisitive you are, Harry! You always want to know what one has been
doing. I always want to forget what I have been doing. I came in at
half-past two, if you wish to know the exact time. I had left my
latch-key at home, and my servant had to let me in. If you want any
corroborative evidence on the subject, you can ask him."

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. "My dear fellow, as if I cared! Let
us go up to the drawing-room. No sherry, thank you, Mr. Chapman.
Something has happened to you, Dorian. Tell me what it is. You are not
yourself to-night."

"Don't mind me, Harry. I am irritable, and out of temper. I shall come
round and see you to-morrow, or next day. Make my excuses to Lady
Narborough. I shan't go upstairs. I shall go home. I must go home."

"All right, Dorian. I dare say I shall see you to-morrow at tea-time.
The duchess is coming."

"I will try to be there, Harry," he said, leaving the room. As he drove
back to his own house, he was conscious that the sense of terror he
thought he had strangled had come back to him. Lord Henry's casual
questioning had made him lose his nerve for the moment, and he wanted
his nerve still. Things that were dangerous had to be destroyed. He
winced. He hated the idea of even touching them.

Yet it had to be done. He realized that, and when he had locked the
door of his library, he opened the secret press into which he had
thrust Basil Hallward's coat and bag. A huge fire was blazing. He piled
another log on it. The smell of the singeing clothes and burning
leather was horrible. It took him three-quarters of an hour to consume
everything. At the end he felt faint and sick, and having lit some
Algerian pastilles in a pierced copper brazier, he bathed his hands and
forehead with a cool musk-scented vinegar.

Suddenly he started. His eyes grew strangely bright, and he gnawed
nervously at his underlip. Between two of the windows stood a large
Florentine cabinet, made out of ebony and inlaid with ivory and blue
lapis. He watched it as though it were a thing that could fascinate and
make afraid, as though it held something that he longed for and yet
almost loathed. His breath quickened. A mad craving came over him. He
lit a cigarette and then threw it away. His eyelids drooped till the
long fringed lashes almost touched his cheek. But he still watched the
cabinet. At last he got up from the sofa on which he had been lying,
went over to it, and having unlocked it, touched some hidden spring. A
triangular drawer passed slowly out. His fingers moved instinctively
towards it, dipped in, and closed on something. It was a small Chinese
box of black and gold-dust lacquer, elaborately wrought, the sides
patterned with curved waves, and the silken cords hung with round
crystals and tasselled in plaited metal threads. He opened it. Inside
was a green paste, waxy in lustre, the odour curiously heavy and
persistent.

He hesitated for some moments, with a strangely immobile smile upon his
face. Then shivering, though the atmosphere of the room was terribly
hot, he drew himself up and glanced at the clock. It was twenty minutes
to twelve. He put the box back, shutting the cabinet doors as he did
so, and went into his bedroom.

As midnight was striking bronze blows upon the dusky air, Dorian Gray,
dressed commonly, and with a muffler wrapped round his throat, crept
quietly out of his house. In Bond Street he found a hansom with a good
horse. He hailed it and in a low voice gave the driver an address.

The man shook his head. "It is too far for me," he muttered.

"Here is a sovereign for you," said Dorian. "You shall have another if
you drive fast."

"All right, sir," answered the man, "you will be there in an hour," and
after his fare had got in he turned his horse round and drove rapidly
towards the river.




CHAPTER XVI.


A cold rain began to fall, and the blurred street-lamps looked ghastly
in the dripping mist. The public-houses were just closing, and dim men
and women were clustering in broken groups round their doors. From some
of the bars came the sound of horrible laughter. In others, drunkards
brawled and screamed.

Lying back in the hansom, with his hat pulled over his forehead, Dorian
Gray watched with listless eyes the sordid shame of the great city, and
now and then he repeated to himself the words that Lord Henry had said
to him on the first day they had met, "To cure the soul by means of the
senses, and the senses by means of the soul." Yes, that was the secret.
He had often tried it, and would try it again now. There were opium
dens where one could buy oblivion, dens of horror where the memory of
old sins could be destroyed by the madness of sins that were new.

The moon hung low in the sky like a yellow skull. From time to time a
huge misshapen cloud stretched a long arm across and hid it. The
gas-lamps grew fewer, and the streets more narrow and gloomy. Once the
man lost his way and had to drive back half a mile. A steam rose from
the horse as it splashed up the puddles. The sidewindows of the hansom
were clogged with a grey-flannel mist.

"To cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of
the soul!" How the words rang in his ears! His soul, certainly, was
sick to death. Was it true that the senses could cure it? Innocent
blood had been spilled. What could atone for that? Ah! for that there
was no atonement; but though forgiveness was impossible, forgetfulness
was possible still, and he was determined to forget, to stamp the thing
out, to crush it as one would crush the adder that had stung one.
Indeed, what right had Basil to have spoken to him as he had done? Who
had made him a judge over others? He had said things that were
dreadful, horrible, not to be endured.

On and on plodded the hansom, going slower, it seemed to him, at each
step. He thrust up the trap and called to the man to drive faster. The
hideous hunger for opium began to gnaw at him. His throat burned and
his delicate hands twitched nervously together. He struck at the horse
madly with his stick. The driver laughed and whipped up. He laughed in
answer, and the man was silent.

The way seemed interminable, and the streets like the black web of some
sprawling spider. The monotony became unbearable, and as the mist
thickened, he felt afraid.

Then they passed by lonely brickfields. The fog was lighter here, and
he could see the strange, bottle-shaped kilns with their orange,
fanlike tongues of fire. A dog barked as they went by, and far away in
the darkness some wandering sea-gull screamed. The horse stumbled in a
rut, then swerved aside and broke into a gallop.

After some time they left the clay road and rattled again over
rough-paven streets. Most of the windows were dark, but now and then
fantastic shadows were silhouetted against some lamplit blind. He
watched them curiously. They moved like monstrous marionettes and made
gestures like live things. He hated them. A dull rage was in his heart.
As they turned a corner, a woman yelled something at them from an open
door, and two men ran after the hansom for about a hundred yards. The
driver beat at them with his whip.

It is said that passion makes one think in a circle. Certainly with
hideous iteration the bitten lips of Dorian Gray shaped and reshaped
those subtle words that dealt with soul and sense, till he had found in
them the full expression, as it were, of his mood, and justified, by
intellectual approval, passions that without such justification would
still have dominated his temper. From cell to cell of his brain crept
the one thought; and the wild desire to live, most terrible of all
man's appetites, quickened into force each trembling nerve and fibre.
Ugliness that had once been hateful to him because it made things real,
became dear to him now for that very reason. Ugliness was the one
reality. The coarse brawl, the loathsome den, the crude violence of
disordered life, the very vileness of thief and outcast, were more
vivid, in their intense actuality of impression, than all the gracious
shapes of art, the dreamy shadows of song. They were what he needed for
forgetfulness. In three days he would be free.

Suddenly the man drew up with a jerk at the top of a dark lane. Over
the low roofs and jagged chimney-stacks of the houses rose the black
masts of ships. Wreaths of white mist clung like ghostly sails to the
yards.

"Somewhere about here, sir, ain't it?" he asked huskily through the
trap.

Dorian started and peered round. "This will do," he answered, and
having got out hastily and given the driver the extra fare he had
promised him, he walked quickly in the direction of the quay. Here and
there a lantern gleamed at the stern of some huge merchantman. The
light shook and splintered in the puddles. A red glare came from an
outward-bound steamer that was coaling. The slimy pavement looked like
a wet mackintosh.

He hurried on towards the left, glancing back now and then to see if he
was being followed. In about seven or eight minutes he reached a small
shabby house that was wedged in between two gaunt factories. In one of
the top-windows stood a lamp. He stopped and gave a peculiar knock.

After a little time he heard steps in the passage and the chain being
unhooked. The door opened quietly, and he went in without saying a word
to the squat misshapen figure that flattened itself into the shadow as
he passed. At the end of the hall hung a tattered green curtain that
swayed and shook in the gusty wind which had followed him in from the
street. He dragged it aside and entered a long low room which looked as
if it had once been a third-rate dancing-saloon. Shrill flaring
gas-jets, dulled and distorted in the fly-blown mirrors that faced
them, were ranged round the walls. Greasy reflectors of ribbed tin
backed them, making quivering disks of light. The floor was covered
with ochre-coloured sawdust, trampled here and there into mud, and
stained with dark rings of spilled liquor. Some Malays were crouching
by a little charcoal stove, playing with bone counters and showing
their white teeth as they chattered. In one corner, with his head
buried in his arms, a sailor sprawled over a table, and by the tawdrily
painted bar that ran across one complete side stood two haggard women,
mocking an old man who was brushing the sleeves of his coat with an
expression of disgust. "He thinks he's got red ants on him," laughed
one of them, as Dorian passed by. The man looked at her in terror and
began to whimper.

At the end of the room there was a little staircase, leading to a
darkened chamber. As Dorian hurried up its three rickety steps, the
heavy odour of opium met him. He heaved a deep breath, and his nostrils
quivered with pleasure. When he entered, a young man with smooth yellow
hair, who was bending over a lamp lighting a long thin pipe, looked up
at him and nodded in a hesitating manner.

"You here, Adrian?" muttered Dorian.

"Where else should I be?" he answered, listlessly. "None of the chaps
will speak to me now."

"I thought you had left England."

"Darlington is not going to do anything. My brother paid the bill at
last. George doesn't speak to me either.... I don't care," he added
with a sigh. "As long as one has this stuff, one doesn't want friends.
I think I have had too many friends."

Dorian winced and looked round at the grotesque things that lay in such
fantastic postures on the ragged mattresses. The twisted limbs, the
gaping mouths, the staring lustreless eyes, fascinated him. He knew in
what strange heavens they were suffering, and what dull hells were
teaching them the secret of some new joy. They were better off than he
was. He was prisoned in thought. Memory, like a horrible malady, was
eating his soul away. From time to time he seemed to see the eyes of
Basil Hallward looking at him. Yet he felt he could not stay. The
presence of Adrian Singleton troubled him. He wanted to be where no one
would know who he was. He wanted to escape from himself.

"I am going on to the other place," he said after a pause.

"On the wharf?"

"Yes."

"That mad-cat is sure to be there. They won't have her in this place
now."

Dorian shrugged his shoulders. "I am sick of women who love one. Women
who hate one are much more interesting. Besides, the stuff is better."

"Much the same."

"I like it better. Come and have something to drink. I must have
something."

"I don't want anything," murmured the young man.

"Never mind."

Adrian Singleton rose up wearily and followed Dorian to the bar. A
half-caste, in a ragged turban and a shabby ulster, grinned a hideous
greeting as he thrust a bottle of brandy and two tumblers in front of
them. The women sidled up and began to chatter. Dorian turned his back
on them and said something in a low voice to Adrian Singleton.

A crooked smile, like a Malay crease, writhed across the face of one of
the women. "We are very proud to-night," she sneered.

"For God's sake don't talk to me," cried Dorian, stamping his foot on
the ground. "What do you want? Money? Here it is. Don't ever talk to me
again."

Two red sparks flashed for a moment in the woman's sodden eyes, then
flickered out and left them dull and glazed. She tossed her head and
raked the coins off the counter with greedy fingers. Her companion
watched her enviously.

"It's no use," sighed Adrian Singleton. "I don't care to go back. What
does it matter? I am quite happy here."

"You will write to me if you want anything, won't you?" said Dorian,
after a pause.

"Perhaps."

"Good night, then."

"Good night," answered the young man, passing up the steps and wiping
his parched mouth with a handkerchief.

Dorian walked to the door with a look of pain in his face. As he drew
the curtain aside, a hideous laugh broke from the painted lips of the
woman who had taken his money. "There goes the devil's bargain!" she
hiccoughed, in a hoarse voice.

"Curse you!" he answered, "don't call me that."

She snapped her fingers. "Prince Charming is what you like to be
called, ain't it?" she yelled after him.

The drowsy sailor leaped to his feet as she spoke, and looked wildly
round. The sound of the shutting of the hall door fell on his ear. He
rushed out as if in pursuit.

Dorian Gray hurried along the quay through the drizzling rain. His
meeting with Adrian Singleton had strangely moved him, and he wondered
if the ruin of that young life was really to be laid at his door, as
Basil Hallward had said to him with such infamy of insult. He bit his
lip, and for a few seconds his eyes grew sad. Yet, after all, what did
it matter to him? One's days were too brief to take the burden of
another's errors on one's shoulders. Each man lived his own life and
paid his own price for living it. The only pity was one had to pay so
often for a single fault. One had to pay over and over again, indeed.
In her dealings with man, destiny never closed her accounts.

There are moments, psychologists tell us, when the passion for sin, or
for what the world calls sin, so dominates a nature that every fibre of
the body, as every cell of the brain, seems to be instinct with fearful
impulses. Men and women at such moments lose the freedom of their will.
They move to their terrible end as automatons move. Choice is taken
from them, and conscience is either killed, or, if it lives at all,
lives but to give rebellion its fascination and disobedience its charm.
For all sins, as theologians weary not of reminding us, are sins of
disobedience. When that high spirit, that morning star of evil, fell
from heaven, it was as a rebel that he fell.

Callous, concentrated on evil, with stained mind, and soul hungry for
rebellion, Dorian Gray hastened on, quickening his step as he went, but
as he darted aside into a dim archway, that had served him often as a
short cut to the ill-famed place where he was going, he felt himself
suddenly seized from behind, and before he had time to defend himself,
he was thrust back against the wall, with a brutal hand round his
throat.

He struggled madly for life, and by a terrible effort wrenched the
tightening fingers away. In a second he heard the click of a revolver,
and saw the gleam of a polished barrel, pointing straight at his head,
and the dusky form of a short, thick-set man facing him.

"What do you want?" he gasped.

"Keep quiet," said the man. "If you stir, I shoot you."

"You are mad. What have I done to you?"

"You wrecked the life of Sibyl Vane," was the answer, "and Sibyl Vane
was my sister. She killed herself. I know it. Her death is at your
door. I swore I would kill you in return. For years I have sought you.
I had no clue, no trace. The two people who could have described you
were dead. I knew nothing of you but the pet name she used to call you.
I heard it to-night by chance. Make your peace with God, for to-night
you are going to die."

Dorian Gray grew sick with fear. "I never knew her," he stammered. "I
never heard of her. You are mad."

"You had better confess your sin, for as sure as I am James Vane, you
are going to die." There was a horrible moment. Dorian did not know
what to say or do. "Down on your knees!" growled the man. "I give you
one minute to make your peace-no more. I go on board to-night for
India, and I must do my job first. One minute. That's all."

Dorian's arms fell to his side. Paralysed with terror, he did not know
what to do. Suddenly a wild hope flashed across his brain. "Stop," he
cried. "How long ago is it since your sister died? Quick, tell me!"

"Eighteen years," said the man. "Why do you ask me? What do years
matter?"

"Eighteen years," laughed Dorian Gray, with a touch of triumph in his
voice. "Eighteen years! Set me under the lamp and look at my face!"

James Vane hesitated for a moment, not understanding what was meant.
Then he seized Dorian Gray and dragged him from the archway.

Dim and wavering as was the wind-blown light, yet it served to show him
the hideous error, as it seemed, into which he had fallen, for the face
of the man he had sought to kill had all the bloom of boyhood, all the
unstained purity of youth. He seemed little more than a lad of twenty
summers, hardly older, if older indeed at all, than his sister had been
when they had parted so many years ago. It was obvious that this was
not the man who had destroyed her life.

He loosened his hold and reeled back. "My God! my God!" he cried, "and
I would have murdered you!"

Dorian Gray drew a long breath. "You have been on the brink of
committing a terrible crime, my man," he said, looking at him sternly.
"Let this be a warning to you not to take vengeance into your own
hands."

"Forgive me, sir," muttered James Vane. "I was deceived. A chance word
I heard in that damned den set me on the wrong track."

"You had better go home and put that pistol away, or you may get into
trouble," said Dorian, turning on his heel and going slowly down the
street.

James Vane stood on the pavement in horror. He was trembling from head
to foot. After a little while, a black shadow that had been creeping
along the dripping wall moved out into the light and came close to him
with stealthy footsteps. He felt a hand laid on his arm and looked
round with a start. It was one of the women who had been drinking at
the bar.

"Why didn't you kill him?" she hissed out, putting haggard face quite
close to his. "I knew you were following him when you rushed out from
Daly's. You fool! You should have killed him. He has lots of money, and
he's as bad as bad."

"He is not the man I am looking for," he answered, "and I want no man's
money. I want a man's life. The man whose life I want must be nearly
forty now. This one is little more than a boy. Thank God, I have not
got his blood upon my hands."

The woman gave a bitter laugh. "Little more than a boy!" she sneered.
"Why, man, it's nigh on eighteen years since Prince Charming made me
what I am."

"You lie!" cried James Vane.

She raised her hand up to heaven. "Before God I am telling the truth,"
she cried.

"Before God?"

"Strike me dumb if it ain't so. He is the worst one that comes here.
They say he has sold himself to the devil for a pretty face. It's nigh
on eighteen years since I met him. He hasn't changed much since then. I
have, though," she added, with a sickly leer.

"You swear this?"

"I swear it," came in hoarse echo from her flat mouth. "But don't give
me away to him," she whined; "I am afraid of him. Let me have some
money for my night's lodging."

He broke from her with an oath and rushed to the corner of the street,
but Dorian Gray had disappeared. When he looked back, the woman had
vanished also.




CHAPTER XVII.


A week later Dorian Gray was sitting in the conservatory at Selby
Royal, talking to the pretty Duchess of Monmouth, who with her husband,
a jaded-looking man of sixty, was amongst his guests. It was tea-time,
and the mellow light of the huge, lace-covered lamp that stood on the
table lit up the delicate china and hammered silver of the service at
which the duchess was presiding. Her white hands were moving daintily
among the cups, and her full red lips were smiling at something that
Dorian had whispered to her. Lord Henry was lying back in a silk-draped
wicker chair, looking at them. On a peach-coloured divan sat Lady
Narborough, pretending to listen to the duke's description of the last
Brazilian beetle that he had added to his collection. Three young men
in elaborate smoking-suits were handing tea-cakes to some of the women.
The house-party consisted of twelve people, and there were more
expected to arrive on the next day.

"What are you two talking about?" said Lord Henry, strolling over to
the table and putting his cup down. "I hope Dorian has told you about
my plan for rechristening everything, Gladys. It is a delightful idea."

"But I don't want to be rechristened, Harry," rejoined the duchess,
looking up at him with her wonderful eyes. "I am quite satisfied with
my own name, and I am sure Mr. Gray should be satisfied with his."

"My dear Gladys, I would not alter either name for the world. They are
both perfect. I was thinking chiefly of flowers. Yesterday I cut an
orchid, for my button-hole. It was a marvellous spotted thing, as
effective as the seven deadly sins. In a thoughtless moment I asked one
of the gardeners what it was called. He told me it was a fine specimen
of _Robinsoniana_, or something dreadful of that kind. It is a sad
truth, but we have lost the faculty of giving lovely names to things.
Names are everything. I never quarrel with actions. My one quarrel is
with words. That is the reason I hate vulgar realism in literature. The
man who could call a spade a spade should be compelled to use one. It
is the only thing he is fit for."

"Then what should we call you, Harry?" she asked.

"His name is Prince Paradox," said Dorian.

"I recognize him in a flash," exclaimed the duchess.

"I won't hear of it," laughed Lord Henry, sinking into a chair. "From a
label there is no escape! I refuse the title."

"Royalties may not abdicate," fell as a warning from pretty lips.

"You wish me to defend my throne, then?"

"Yes."

"I give the truths of to-morrow."

"I prefer the mistakes of to-day," she answered.

"You disarm me, Gladys," he cried, catching the wilfulness of her mood.

"Of your shield, Harry, not of your spear."

"I never tilt against beauty," he said, with a wave of his hand.

"That is your error, Harry, believe me. You value beauty far too much."

"How can you say that? I admit that I think that it is better to be
beautiful than to be good. But on the other hand, no one is more ready
than I am to acknowledge that it is better to be good than to be ugly."

"Ugliness is one of the seven deadly sins, then?" cried the duchess.
"What becomes of your simile about the orchid?"

"Ugliness is one of the seven deadly virtues, Gladys. You, as a good
Tory, must not underrate them. Beer, the Bible, and the seven deadly
virtues have made our England what she is."

"You don't like your country, then?" she asked.

"I live in it."

"That you may censure it the better."

"Would you have me take the verdict of Europe on it?" he inquired.

"What do they say of us?"

"That Tartuffe has emigrated to England and opened a shop."

"Is that yours, Harry?"

"I give it to you."

"I could not use it. It is too true."

"You need not be afraid. Our countrymen never recognize a description."

"They are practical."

"They are more cunning than practical. When they make up their ledger,
they balance stupidity by wealth, and vice by hypocrisy."

"Still, we have done great things."

"Great things have been thrust on us, Gladys."

"We have carried their burden."

"Only as far as the Stock Exchange."

She shook her head. "I believe in the race," she cried.

"It represents the survival of the pushing."

"It has development."

"Decay fascinates me more."

"What of art?" she asked.

"It is a malady."

"Love?"

"An illusion."

"Religion?"

"The fashionable substitute for belief."

"You are a sceptic."

"Never! Scepticism is the beginning of faith."

"What are you?"

"To define is to limit."

"Give me a clue."

"Threads snap. You would lose your way in the labyrinth."

"You bewilder me. Let us talk of some one else."

"Our host is a delightful topic. Years ago he was christened Prince
Charming."

"Ah! don't remind me of that," cried Dorian Gray.

"Our host is rather horrid this evening," answered the duchess,
colouring. "I believe he thinks that Monmouth married me on purely
scientific principles as the best specimen he could find of a modern
butterfly."

"Well, I hope he won't stick pins into you, Duchess," laughed Dorian.

"Oh! my maid does that already, Mr. Gray, when she is annoyed with me."

"And what does she get annoyed with you about, Duchess?"

"For the most trivial things, Mr. Gray, I assure you. Usually because I
come in at ten minutes to nine and tell her that I must be dressed by
half-past eight."

"How unreasonable of her! You should give her warning."

"I daren't, Mr. Gray. Why, she invents hats for me. You remember the
one I wore at Lady Hilstone's garden-party? You don't, but it is nice
of you to pretend that you do. Well, she made it out of nothing. All
good hats are made out of nothing."

"Like all good reputations, Gladys," interrupted Lord Henry. "Every
effect that one produces gives one an enemy. To be popular one must be
a mediocrity."

"Not with women," said the duchess, shaking her head; "and women rule
the world. I assure you we can't bear mediocrities. We women, as some
one says, love with our ears, just as you men love with your eyes, if
you ever love at all."

"It seems to me that we never do anything else," murmured Dorian.

"Ah! then, you never really love, Mr. Gray," answered the duchess with
mock sadness.

"My dear Gladys!" cried Lord Henry. "How can you say that? Romance
lives by repetition, and repetition converts an appetite into an art.
Besides, each time that one loves is the only time one has ever loved.
Difference of object does not alter singleness of passion. It merely
intensifies it. We can have in life but one great experience at best,
and the secret of life is to reproduce that experience as often as
possible."

"Even when one has been wounded by it, Harry?" asked the duchess after
a pause.

"Especially when one has been wounded by it," answered Lord Henry.

The duchess turned and looked at Dorian Gray with a curious expression
in her eyes. "What do you say to that, Mr. Gray?" she inquired.

Dorian hesitated for a moment. Then he threw his head back and laughed.
"I always agree with Harry, Duchess."

"Even when he is wrong?"

"Harry is never wrong, Duchess."

"And does his philosophy make you happy?"

"I have never searched for happiness. Who wants happiness? I have
searched for pleasure."

"And found it, Mr. Gray?"

"Often. Too often."

The duchess sighed. "I am searching for peace," she said, "and if I
don't go and dress, I shall have none this evening."

"Let me get you some orchids, Duchess," cried Dorian, starting to his
feet and walking down the conservatory.

"You are flirting disgracefully with him," said Lord Henry to his
cousin. "You had better take care. He is very fascinating."

"If he were not, there would be no battle."

"Greek meets Greek, then?"

"I am on the side of the Trojans. They fought for a woman."

"They were defeated."

"There are worse things than capture," she answered.

"You gallop with a loose rein."

"Pace gives life," was the _riposte_.

"I shall write it in my diary to-night."

"What?"

"That a burnt child loves the fire."

"I am not even singed. My wings are untouched."

"You use them for everything, except flight."

"Courage has passed from men to women. It is a new experience for us."

"You have a rival."

"Who?"

He laughed. "Lady Narborough," he whispered. "She perfectly adores
him."

"You fill me with apprehension. The appeal to antiquity is fatal to us
who are romanticists."

"Romanticists! You have all the methods of science."

"Men have educated us."

"But not explained you."

"Describe us as a sex," was her challenge.

"Sphinxes without secrets."

She looked at him, smiling. "How long Mr. Gray is!" she said. "Let us
go and help him. I have not yet told him the colour of my frock."

"Ah! you must suit your frock to his flowers, Gladys."

"That would be a premature surrender."

"Romantic art begins with its climax."

"I must keep an opportunity for retreat."

"In the Parthian manner?"

"They found safety in the desert. I could not do that."

"Women are not always allowed a choice," he answered, but hardly had he
finished the sentence before from the far end of the conservatory came
a stifled groan, followed by the dull sound of a heavy fall. Everybody
started up. The duchess stood motionless in horror. And with fear in
his eyes, Lord Henry rushed through the flapping palms to find Dorian
Gray lying face downwards on the tiled floor in a deathlike swoon.

He was carried at once into the blue drawing-room and laid upon one of
the sofas. After a short time, he came to himself and looked round with
a dazed expression.

"What has happened?" he asked. "Oh! I remember. Am I safe here, Harry?"
He began to tremble.

"My dear Dorian," answered Lord Henry, "you merely fainted. That was
all. You must have overtired yourself. You had better not come down to
dinner. I will take your place."

"No, I will come down," he said, struggling to his feet. "I would
rather come down. I must not be alone."

He went to his room and dressed. There was a wild recklessness of
gaiety in his manner as he sat at table, but now and then a thrill of
terror ran through him when he remembered that, pressed against the
window of the conservatory, like a white handkerchief, he had seen the
face of James Vane watching him.




CHAPTER XVIII.


The next day he did not leave the house, and, indeed, spent most of the
time in his own room, sick with a wild terror of dying, and yet
indifferent to life itself. The consciousness of being hunted, snared,
tracked down, had begun to dominate him. If the tapestry did but
tremble in the wind, he shook. The dead leaves that were blown against
the leaded panes seemed to him like his own wasted resolutions and wild
regrets. When he closed his eyes, he saw again the sailor's face
peering through the mist-stained glass, and horror seemed once more to
lay its hand upon his heart.

But perhaps it had been only his fancy that had called vengeance out of
the night and set the hideous shapes of punishment before him. Actual
life was chaos, but there was something terribly logical in the
imagination. It was the imagination that set remorse to dog the feet of
sin. It was the imagination that made each crime bear its misshapen
brood. In the common world of fact the wicked were not punished, nor
the good rewarded. Success was given to the strong, failure thrust upon
the weak. That was all. Besides, had any stranger been prowling round
the house, he would have been seen by the servants or the keepers. Had
any foot-marks been found on the flower-beds, the gardeners would have
reported it. Yes, it had been merely fancy. Sibyl Vane's brother had
not come back to kill him. He had sailed away in his ship to founder in
some winter sea. From him, at any rate, he was safe. Why, the man did
not know who he was, could not know who he was. The mask of youth had
saved him.

And yet if it had been merely an illusion, how terrible it was to think
that conscience could raise such fearful phantoms, and give them
visible form, and make them move before one! What sort of life would
his be if, day and night, shadows of his crime were to peer at him from
silent corners, to mock him from secret places, to whisper in his ear
as he sat at the feast, to wake him with icy fingers as he lay asleep!
As the thought crept through his brain, he grew pale with terror, and
the air seemed to him to have become suddenly colder. Oh! in what a
wild hour of madness he had killed his friend! How ghastly the mere
memory of the scene! He saw it all again. Each hideous detail came back
to him with added horror. Out of the black cave of time, terrible and
swathed in scarlet, rose the image of his sin. When Lord Henry came in
at six o'clock, he found him crying as one whose heart will break.

It was not till the third day that he ventured to go out. There was
something in the clear, pine-scented air of that winter morning that
seemed to bring him back his joyousness and his ardour for life. But it
was not merely the physical conditions of environment that had caused
the change. His own nature had revolted against the excess of anguish
that had sought to maim and mar the perfection of its calm. With subtle
and finely wrought temperaments it is always so. Their strong passions
must either bruise or bend. They either slay the man, or themselves
die. Shallow sorrows and shallow loves live on. The loves and sorrows
that are great are destroyed by their own plenitude. Besides, he had
convinced himself that he had been the victim of a terror-stricken
imagination, and looked back now on his fears with something of pity
and not a little of contempt.

After breakfast, he walked with the duchess for an hour in the garden
and then drove across the park to join the shooting-party. The crisp
frost lay like salt upon the grass. The sky was an inverted cup of blue
metal. A thin film of ice bordered the flat, reed-grown lake.

At the corner of the pine-wood he caught sight of Sir Geoffrey
Clouston, the duchess's brother, jerking two spent cartridges out of
his gun. He jumped from the cart, and having told the groom to take the
mare home, made his way towards his guest through the withered bracken
and rough undergrowth.

"Have you had good sport, Geoffrey?" he asked.

"Not very good, Dorian. I think most of the birds have gone to the
open. I dare say it will be better after lunch, when we get to new
ground."

Dorian strolled along by his side. The keen aromatic air, the brown and
red lights that glimmered in the wood, the hoarse cries of the beaters
ringing out from time to time, and the sharp snaps of the guns that
followed, fascinated him and filled him with a sense of delightful
freedom. He was dominated by the carelessness of happiness, by the high
indifference of joy.

Suddenly from a lumpy tussock of old grass some twenty yards in front
of them, with black-tipped ears erect and long hinder limbs throwing it
forward, started a hare. It bolted for a thicket of alders. Sir
Geoffrey put his gun to his shoulder, but there was something in the
animal's grace of movement that strangely charmed Dorian Gray, and he
cried out at once, "Don't shoot it, Geoffrey. Let it live."

"What nonsense, Dorian!" laughed his companion, and as the hare bounded
into the thicket, he fired. There were two cries heard, the cry of a
hare in pain, which is dreadful, the cry of a man in agony, which is
worse.

"Good heavens! I have hit a beater!" exclaimed Sir Geoffrey. "What an
ass the man was to get in front of the guns! Stop shooting there!" he
called out at the top of his voice. "A man is hurt."

The head-keeper came running up with a stick in his hand.

"Where, sir? Where is he?" he shouted. At the same time, the firing
ceased along the line.

"Here," answered Sir Geoffrey angrily, hurrying towards the thicket.
"Why on earth don't you keep your men back? Spoiled my shooting for the
day."

Dorian watched them as they plunged into the alder-clump, brushing the
lithe swinging branches aside. In a few moments they emerged, dragging
a body after them into the sunlight. He turned away in horror. It
seemed to him that misfortune followed wherever he went. He heard Sir
Geoffrey ask if the man was really dead, and the affirmative answer of
the keeper. The wood seemed to him to have become suddenly alive with
faces. There was the trampling of myriad feet and the low buzz of
voices. A great copper-breasted pheasant came beating through the
boughs overhead.

After a few moments-that were to him, in his perturbed state, like
endless hours of pain-he felt a hand laid on his shoulder. He started
and looked round.

"Dorian," said Lord Henry, "I had better tell them that the shooting is
stopped for to-day. It would not look well to go on."

"I wish it were stopped for ever, Harry," he answered bitterly. "The
whole thing is hideous and cruel. Is the man ...?"

He could not finish the sentence.

"I am afraid so," rejoined Lord Henry. "He got the whole charge of shot
in his chest. He must have died almost instantaneously. Come; let us go
home."

They walked side by side in the direction of the avenue for nearly
fifty yards without speaking. Then Dorian looked at Lord Henry and
said, with a heavy sigh, "It is a bad omen, Harry, a very bad omen."

"What is?" asked Lord Henry. "Oh! this accident, I suppose. My dear
fellow, it can't be helped. It was the man's own fault. Why did he get
in front of the guns? Besides, it is nothing to us. It is rather
awkward for Geoffrey, of course. It does not do to pepper beaters. It
makes people think that one is a wild shot. And Geoffrey is not; he
shoots very straight. But there is no use talking about the matter."

Dorian shook his head. "It is a bad omen, Harry. I feel as if something
horrible were going to happen to some of us. To myself, perhaps," he
added, passing his hand over his eyes, with a gesture of pain.

The elder man laughed. "The only horrible thing in the world is
_ennui_, Dorian. That is the one sin for which there is no forgiveness.
But we are not likely to suffer from it unless these fellows keep
chattering about this thing at dinner. I must tell them that the
subject is to be tabooed. As for omens, there is no such thing as an
omen. Destiny does not send us heralds. She is too wise or too cruel
for that. Besides, what on earth could happen to you, Dorian? You have
everything in the world that a man can want. There is no one who would
not be delighted to change places with you."

"There is no one with whom I would not change places, Harry. Don't
laugh like that. I am telling you the truth. The wretched peasant who
has just died is better off than I am. I have no terror of death. It is
the coming of death that terrifies me. Its monstrous wings seem to
wheel in the leaden air around me. Good heavens! don't you see a man
moving behind the trees there, watching me, waiting for me?"

Lord Henry looked in the direction in which the trembling gloved hand
was pointing. "Yes," he said, smiling, "I see the gardener waiting for
you. I suppose he wants to ask you what flowers you wish to have on the
table to-night. How absurdly nervous you are, my dear fellow! You must
come and see my doctor, when we get back to town."

Dorian heaved a sigh of relief as he saw the gardener approaching. The
man touched his hat, glanced for a moment at Lord Henry in a hesitating
manner, and then produced a letter, which he handed to his master. "Her
Grace told me to wait for an answer," he murmured.

Dorian put the letter into his pocket. "Tell her Grace that I am coming
in," he said, coldly. The man turned round and went rapidly in the
direction of the house.

"How fond women are of doing dangerous things!" laughed Lord Henry. "It
is one of the qualities in them that I admire most. A woman will flirt
with anybody in the world as long as other people are looking on."

"How fond you are of saying dangerous things, Harry! In the present
instance, you are quite astray. I like the duchess very much, but I
don't love her."

"And the duchess loves you very much, but she likes you less, so you
are excellently matched."

"You are talking scandal, Harry, and there is never any basis for
scandal."

"The basis of every scandal is an immoral certainty," said Lord Henry,
lighting a cigarette.

"You would sacrifice anybody, Harry, for the sake of an epigram."

"The world goes to the altar of its own accord," was the answer.

"I wish I could love," cried Dorian Gray with a deep note of pathos in
his voice. "But I seem to have lost the passion and forgotten the
desire. I am too much concentrated on myself. My own personality has
become a burden to me. I want to escape, to go away, to forget. It was
silly of me to come down here at all. I think I shall send a wire to
Harvey to have the yacht got ready. On a yacht one is safe."

"Safe from what, Dorian? You are in some trouble. Why not tell me what
it is? You know I would help you."

"I can't tell you, Harry," he answered sadly. "And I dare say it is
only a fancy of mine. This unfortunate accident has upset me. I have a
horrible presentiment that something of the kind may happen to me."

"What nonsense!"

"I hope it is, but I can't help feeling it. Ah! here is the duchess,
looking like Artemis in a tailor-made gown. You see we have come back,
Duchess."

"I have heard all about it, Mr. Gray," she answered. "Poor Geoffrey is
terribly upset. And it seems that you asked him not to shoot the hare.
How curious!"

"Yes, it was very curious. I don't know what made me say it. Some whim,
I suppose. It looked the loveliest of little live things. But I am
sorry they told you about the man. It is a hideous subject."

"It is an annoying subject," broke in Lord Henry. "It has no
psychological value at all. Now if Geoffrey had done the thing on
purpose, how interesting he would be! I should like to know some one
who had committed a real murder."

"How horrid of you, Harry!" cried the duchess. "Isn't it, Mr. Gray?
Harry, Mr. Gray is ill again. He is going to faint."

Dorian drew himself up with an effort and smiled. "It is nothing,
Duchess," he murmured; "my nerves are dreadfully out of order. That is
all. I am afraid I walked too far this morning. I didn't hear what
Harry said. Was it very bad? You must tell me some other time. I think
I must go and lie down. You will excuse me, won't you?"

They had reached the great flight of steps that led from the
conservatory on to the terrace. As the glass door closed behind Dorian,
Lord Henry turned and looked at the duchess with his slumberous eyes.
"Are you very much in love with him?" he asked.

She did not answer for some time, but stood gazing at the landscape. "I
wish I knew," she said at last.

He shook his head. "Knowledge would be fatal. It is the uncertainty
that charms one. A mist makes things wonderful."

"One may lose one's way."

"All ways end at the same point, my dear Gladys."

"What is that?"

"Disillusion."

"It was my _d'ebut_ in life," she sighed.

"It came to you crowned."

"I am tired of strawberry leaves."

"They become you."

"Only in public."

"You would miss them," said Lord Henry.

"I will not part with a petal."

"Monmouth has ears."

"Old age is dull of hearing."

"Has he never been jealous?"

"I wish he had been."

He glanced about as if in search of something. "What are you looking
for?" she inquired.

"The button from your foil," he answered. "You have dropped it."

She laughed. "I have still the mask."

"It makes your eyes lovelier," was his reply.

She laughed again. Her teeth showed like white seeds in a scarlet
fruit.

Upstairs, in his own room, Dorian Gray was lying on a sofa, with terror
in every tingling fibre of his body. Life had suddenly become too
hideous a burden for him to bear. The dreadful death of the unlucky
beater, shot in the thicket like a wild animal, had seemed to him to
pre-figure death for himself also. He had nearly swooned at what Lord
Henry had said in a chance mood of cynical jesting.

At five o'clock he rang his bell for his servant and gave him orders to
pack his things for the night-express to town, and to have the brougham
at the door by eight-thirty. He was determined not to sleep another
night at Selby Royal. It was an ill-omened place. Death walked there in
the sunlight. The grass of the forest had been spotted with blood.

Then he wrote a note to Lord Henry, telling him that he was going up to
town to consult his doctor and asking him to entertain his guests in
his absence. As he was putting it into the envelope, a knock came to
the door, and his valet informed him that the head-keeper wished to see
him. He frowned and bit his lip. "Send him in," he muttered, after some
moments' hesitation.

As soon as the man entered, Dorian pulled his chequebook out of a
drawer and spread it out before him.

"I suppose you have come about the unfortunate accident of this
morning, Thornton?" he said, taking up a pen.

"Yes, sir," answered the gamekeeper.

"Was the poor fellow married? Had he any people dependent on him?"
asked Dorian, looking bored. "If so, I should not like them to be left
in want, and will send them any sum of money you may think necessary."

"We don't know who he is, sir. That is what I took the liberty of
coming to you about."

"Don't know who he is?" said Dorian, listlessly. "What do you mean?
Wasn't he one of your men?"

"No, sir. Never saw him before. Seems like a sailor, sir."

The pen dropped from Dorian Gray's hand, and he felt as if his heart
had suddenly stopped beating. "A sailor?" he cried out. "Did you say a
sailor?"

"Yes, sir. He looks as if he had been a sort of sailor; tattooed on
both arms, and that kind of thing."

"Was there anything found on him?" said Dorian, leaning forward and
looking at the man with startled eyes. "Anything that would tell his
name?"

"Some money, sir-not much, and a six-shooter. There was no name of any
kind. A decent-looking man, sir, but rough-like. A sort of sailor we
think."

Dorian started to his feet. A terrible hope fluttered past him. He
clutched at it madly. "Where is the body?" he exclaimed. "Quick! I must
see it at once."

"It is in an empty stable in the Home Farm, sir. The folk don't like to
have that sort of thing in their houses. They say a corpse brings bad
luck."

"The Home Farm! Go there at once and meet me. Tell one of the grooms to
bring my horse round. No. Never mind. I'll go to the stables myself. It
will save time."

In less than a quarter of an hour, Dorian Gray was galloping down the
long avenue as hard as he could go. The trees seemed to sweep past him
in spectral procession, and wild shadows to fling themselves across his
path. Once the mare swerved at a white gate-post and nearly threw him.
He lashed her across the neck with his crop. She cleft the dusky air
like an arrow. The stones flew from her hoofs.

At last he reached the Home Farm. Two men were loitering in the yard.
He leaped from the saddle and threw the reins to one of them. In the
farthest stable a light was glimmering. Something seemed to tell him
that the body was there, and he hurried to the door and put his hand
upon the latch.

There he paused for a moment, feeling that he was on the brink of a
discovery that would either make or mar his life. Then he thrust the
door open and entered.

On a heap of sacking in the far corner was lying the dead body of a man
dressed in a coarse shirt and a pair of blue trousers. A spotted
handkerchief had been placed over the face. A coarse candle, stuck in a
bottle, sputtered beside it.

Dorian Gray shuddered. He felt that his could not be the hand to take
the handkerchief away, and called out to one of the farm-servants to
seemed to Lord Arthur that this hobby of the good Dean's offered him an
excellent opportunity for carrying out his scheme.  Where to procure an
explosive machine was, of course, quite another matter.  The London
Directory gave him no information on the point, and he felt that there
was very little use in going to Scotland Yard about it, as they never
seemed to know anything about the movements of the dynamite faction till
after an explosion had taken place, and not much even then.

Suddenly he thought of his friend Rouvaloff, a young Russian of very
revolutionary tendencies, whom he had met at Lady Windermere's in the
winter.  Count Rouvaloff was supposed to be writing a life of Peter the
Great, and to have come over to England for the purpose of studying the
documents relating to that Tsar's residence in this country as a ship
carpenter; but it was generally suspected that he was a Nihilist agent,
and there was no doubt that the Russian Embassy did not look with any
favour upon his presence in London.  Lord Arthur felt that he was just
the man for his purpose, and drove down one morning to his lodgings in
Bloomsbury, to ask his advice and assistance.

'So you are taking up politics seriously?' said Count Rouvaloff, when
Lord Arthur had told him the object of his mission; but Lord Arthur, who
hated swagger of any kind, felt bound to admit to him that he had not the
slightest interest in social questions, and simply wanted the explosive
machine for a purely family matter, in which no one was concerned but
himself.

Count Rouvaloff looked at him for some moments in amazement, and then
seeing that he was quite serious, wrote an address on a piece of paper,
initialled it, and handed it to him across the table.

'Scotland Yard would give a good deal to know this address, my dear
fellow.'

'They shan't have it,' cried Lord Arthur, laughing; and after shaking the
young Russian warmly by the hand he ran downstairs, examined the paper,
and told the coachman to drive to Soho Square.

There he dismissed him, and strolled down Greek Street, till he came to a
place called Bayle's Court.  He passed under the archway, and found
himself in a curious _cul-de-sac_, that was apparently occupied by a
French Laundry, as a perfect network of clothes-lines was stretched
across from house to house, and there was a flutter of white linen in the
morning air.  He walked right to the end, and knocked at a little green
house.  After some delay, during which every window in the court became a
blurred mass of peering faces, the door was opened by a rather
rough-looking foreigner, who asked him in very bad English what his
business was.  Lord Arthur handed him the paper Count Rouvaloff had given
him.  When the man saw it he bowed, and invited Lord Arthur into a very
shabby front parlour on the ground floor, and in a few moments Herr
Winckelkopf, as he was called in England, bustled into the room, with a
very wine-stained napkin round his neck, and a fork in his left hand.

'Count Rouvaloff has given me an introduction to you,' said Lord Arthur,
bowing, 'and I am anxious to have a short interview with you on a matter
of business.  My name is Smith, Mr. Robert Smith, and I want you to
supply me with an explosive clock.'

'Charmed to meet you, Lord Arthur,' said the genial little German,
laughing.  'Don't look so alarmed, it is my duty to know everybody, and I
remember seeing you one evening at Lady Windermere's.  I hope her
ladyship is quite well.  Do you mind sitting with me while I finish my
breakfast?  There is an excellent _p^at'e_, and my friends are kind enough
to say that my Rhine wine is better than any they get at the German
Embassy,' and before Lord Arthur had got over his surprise at being
recognised, he found himself seated in the back-room, sipping the most
delicious Marcobr"unner out of a pale yellow hock-glass marked with the
Imperial monogram, and chatting in the friendliest manner possible to the
famous conspirator.

'Explosive clocks,' said Herr Winckelkopf, 'are not very good things for
foreign exportation, as, even if they succeed in passing the Custom
House, the train service is so irregular, that they usually go off before
they have reached their proper destination.  If, however, you want one
for home use, I can supply you with an excellent article, and guarantee
that you will he satisfied with the result.  May I ask for whom it is
intended?  If it is for the police, or for any one connected with
Scotland Yard, I am afraid I cannot do anything for you.  The English
detectives are really our best friends, and I have always found that by
relying on their stupidity, we can do exactly what we like.  I could not
spare one of them.'

'I assure you,' said Lord Arthur, 'that it has nothing to do with the
police at all.  In fact, the clock is intended for the Dean of
Chichester.'

'Dear me!  I had no idea that you felt so strongly about religion, Lord
Arthur.  Few young men do nowadays.'

'I am afraid you overrate me, Herr Winckelkopf,' said Lord Arthur,
blushing.  'The fact is, I really know nothing about theology.'

'It is a purely private matter then?'

'Purely private.'

Herr Winckelkopf shrugged his shoulders, and left the room, returning in
a few minutes with a round cake of dynamite about the size of a penny,
and a pretty little French clock, surmounted by an ormolu figure of
Liberty trampling on the hydra of Despotism.

Lord Arthur's face brightened up when he saw it.  'That is just what I
want,' he cried, 'and now tell me how it goes off.'

'Ah! there is my secret,' answered Herr Winckelkopf, contemplating his
invention with a justifiable look of pride; 'let me know when you wish it
to explode, and I will set the machine to the moment.'

'Well, to-day is Tuesday, and if you could send it off at once-'

'That is impossible; I have a great deal of important work on hand for
some friends of mine in Moscow.  Still, I might send it off to-morrow.'

'Oh, it will be quite time enough!' said Lord Arthur politely, 'if it is
delivered to-morrow night or Thursday morning.  For the moment of the
explosion, say Friday at noon exactly.  The Dean is always at home at
that hour.'

'Friday, at noon,' repeated Herr Winckelkopf, and he made a note to that
effect in a large ledger that was lying on a bureau near the fireplace.

'And now,' said Lord Arthur, rising from his seat, 'pray let me know how
much I am in your debt.'

'It is such a small matter, Lord Arthur, that I do not care to make any
charge.  The dynamite comes to seven and sixpence, the clock will be
three pounds ten, and the carriage about five shillings.  I am only too
pleased to oblige any friend of Count Rouvaloff's.'

'But your trouble, Herr Winckelkopf?'

'Oh, that is nothing!  It is a pleasure to me.  I do not work for money;
I live entirely for my art.'

Lord Arthur laid down lb4, 2s. 6d. on the table, thanked the little German
for his kindness, and, having succeeded in declining an invitation to
meet some Anarchists at a meat-tea on the following Saturday, left the
house and went off to the Park.

For the next two days he was in a state of the greatest excitement, and
on Friday at twelve o'clock he drove down to the Buckingham to wait for
news.  All the afternoon the stolid hall-porter kept posting up telegrams
from various parts of the country giving the results of horse-races, the
verdicts in divorce suits, the state of the weather, and the like, while
the tape ticked out wearisome details about an all-night sitting in the
House of Commons, and a small panic on the Stock Exchange.  At four
o'clock the evening papers came in, and Lord Arthur disappeared into the
library with the _Pall Mall_, the _St. James's_, the _Globe_, and the
_Echo_, to the immense indignation of Colonel Goodchild, who wanted to
read the reports of a speech he had delivered that morning at the Mansion
House, on the subject of South African Missions, and the advisability of
having black Bishops in every province, and for some reason or other had
a strong prejudice against the _Evening News_.  None of the papers,
however, contained even the slightest allusion to Chichester, and Lord
Arthur felt that the attempt must have failed.  It was a terrible blow to
him, and for a time he was quite unnerved.  Herr Winckelkopf, whom he
went to see the next day was full of elaborate apologies, and offered to
supply him with another clock free of charge, or with a case of
nitro-glycerine bombs at cost price.  But he had lost all faith in
explosives, and Herr Winckelkopf himself acknowledged that everything is
so adulterated nowadays, that even dynamite can hardly be got in a pure
condition.  The little German, however, while admitting that something
must have gone wrong with the machinery, was not without hope that the
clock might still go off, and instanced the case of a barometer that he
had once sent to the military Governor at Odessa, which, though timed to
explode in ten days, had not done so for something like three months.  It
was quite true that when it did go off, it merely succeeded in blowing a
housemaid to atoms, the Governor having gone out of town six weeks
before, but at least it showed that dynamite, as a destructive force,
was, when under the control of machinery, a powerful, though a somewhat
unpunctual agent.  Lord Arthur was a little consoled by this reflection,
but even here he was destined to disappointment, for two days afterwards,
as he was going upstairs, the Duchess called him into her boudoir, and
showed him a letter she had just received from the Deanery.

'Jane writes charming letters,' said the Duchess; 'you must really read
her last.  It is quite as good as the novels Mudie sends us.'

Lord Arthur seized the letter from her hand.  It ran as follows:-

                                                  THE DEANERY, CHICHESTER,
                                                             27_th_ _May_.

    My Dearest Aunt,

    Thank you so much for the flannel for the Dorcas Society, and also
    for the gingham.  I quite agree with you that it is nonsense their
    wanting to wear pretty things, but everybody is so Radical and
    irreligious nowadays, that it is difficult to make them see that they
    should not try and dress like the upper classes.  I am sure I don't
    know what we are coming to.  As papa has often said in his sermons,
    we live in an age of unbelief.

    We have had great fun over a clock that an unknown admirer sent papa
    last Thursday.  It arrived in a wooden box from London, carriage
    paid, and papa feels it must have been sent by some one who had read
    his remarkable sermon, 'Is Licence Liberty?' for on the top of the
    clock was a figure of a woman, with what papa said was the cap of
    Liberty on her head.  I didn't think it very becoming myself, but
    papa said it was historical, so I suppose it is all right.  Parker
    unpacked it, and papa put it on the mantelpiece in the library, and
    we were all sitting there on Friday morning, when just as the clock
    struck twelve, we heard a whirring noise, a little puff of smoke came
    from the pedestal of the figure, and the goddess of Liberty fell off,
    and broke her nose on the fender!  Maria was quite alarmed, but it
    looked so ridiculous, that James and I went off into fits of
    laughter, and even papa was amused.  When we examined it, we found it
    was a sort of alarum clock, and that, if you set it to a particular
    hour, and put some gunpowder and a cap under a little hammer, it went
    off whenever you wanted.  Papa said it must not remain in the
    library, as it made a noise, so Reggie carried it away to the
    schoolroom, and does nothing but have small explosions all day long.
    Do you think Arthur would like one for a wedding present?  I suppose
    they are quite fashionable in London.  Papa says they should do a
    great deal of good, as they show that Liberty can't last, but must
    fall down.  Papa says Liberty was invented at the time of the French
    Revolution.  How awful it seems!

    I have now to go to the Dorcas, where I will read them your most
    instructive letter.  How true, dear aunt, your idea is, that in their
    rank of life they should wear what is unbecoming.  I must say it is
    absurd, their anxiety about dress, when there are so many more
    important things in this world, and in the next.  I am so glad your
    flowered poplin turned out so well, and that your lace was not torn.
    I am wearing my yellow satin, that you so kindly gave me, at the
    Bishop's on Wednesday, and think it will look all right.  Would you
    have bows or not?  Jennings says that every one wears bows now, and
    that the underskirt should be frilled.  Reggie has just had another
    explosion, and papa has ordered the clock to be sent to the stables.
    I don't think papa likes it so much as he did at first, though he is
    very flattered at being sent such a pretty and ingenious toy.  It
    shows that people read his sermons, and profit by them.

    Papa sends his love, in which James, and Reggie, and Maria all unite,
    and, hoping that Uncle Cecil's gout is better, believe me, dear aunt,
    ever your affectionate niece,

                                                               JANE PERCY.

    _PS._-Do tell me about the bows.  Jennings insists they are the
    fashion.

Lord Arthur looked so serious and unhappy over the letter, that the
Duchess went into fits of laughter.

'My dear Arthur,' she cried, 'I shall never show you a young lady's
letter again!  But what shall I say about the clock?  I think it is a
capital invention, and I should like to have one myself.'

'I don't think much of them,' said Lord Arthur, with a sad smile, and,
after kissing his mother, he left the room.

When he got upstairs, he flung himself on a sofa, and his eyes filled
with tears.  He had done his best to commit this murder, but on both
occasions he had failed, and through no fault of his own.  He had tried
to do his duty, but it seemed as if Destiny herself had turned traitor.
He was oppressed with the sense of the barrenness of good intentions, of
the futility of trying to be fine.  Perhaps, it would be better to break
off the marriage altogether.  Sybil would suffer, it is true, but
suffering could not really mar a nature so noble as hers.  As for
himself, what did it matter?  There is always some war in which a man can
die, some cause to which a man can give his life, and as life had no
pleasure for him, so death had no terror.  Let Destiny work out his doom.
He would not stir to help her.

At half-past seven he dressed, and went down to the club.  Surbiton was
there with a party of young men, and he was obliged to dine with them.
Their trivial conversation and idle jests did not interest him, and as
soon as coffee was brought he left them, inventing some engagement in
order to get away.  As he was going out of the club, the hall-porter
handed him a letter.  It was from Herr Winckelkopf, asking him to call
down the next evening, and look at an explosive umbrella, that went off
as soon as it was opened.  It was the very latest invention, and had just
arrived from Geneva.  He tore the letter up into fragments.  He had made
up his mind not to try any more experiments.  Then he wandered down to
the Thames Embankment, and sat for hours by the river.  The moon peered
through a mane of tawny clouds, as if it were a lion's eye, and
innumerable stars spangled the hollow vault, like gold dust powdered on a
purple dome.  Now and then a barge swung out into the turbid stream, and
floated away with the tide, and the railway signals changed from green to
scarlet as the trains ran shrieking across the bridge.  After some time,
twelve o'clock boomed from the tall tower at Westminster, and at each
stroke of the sonorous bell the night seemed to tremble.  Then the
railway lights went out, one solitary lamp left gleaming like a large
ruby on a giant mast, and the roar of the city became fainter.

At two o'clock he got up, and strolled towards Blackfriars.  How unreal
everything looked!  How like a strange dream!  The houses on the other
side of the river seemed built out of darkness.  One would have said that
silver and shadow had fashioned the world anew.  The huge dome of St.
Paul's loomed like a bubble through the dusky air.

As he approached Cleopatra's Needle he saw a man leaning over the
parapet, and as he came nearer the man looked up, the gas-light falling
full upon his face.

It was Mr. Podgers, the cheiromantist!  No one could mistake the fat,
flabby face, the gold-rimmed spectacles, the sickly feeble smile, the
sensual mouth.

Lord Arthur stopped.  A brilliant idea flashed across him, and he stole
softly up behind.  In a moment he had seized Mr. Podgers by the legs, and
flung him into the Thames.  There was a coarse oath, a heavy splash, and
all was still.  Lord Arthur looked anxiously over, but could see nothing
of the cheiromantist but a tall hat, pirouetting in an eddy of moonlit
water.  After a time it also sank, and no trace of Mr. Podgers was
visible.  Once he thought that he caught sight of the bulky misshapen
figure striking out for the staircase by the bridge, and a horrible
feeling of failure came over him, but it turned out to be merely a
reflection, and when the moon shone out from behind a cloud it passed
away.  At last he seemed to have realised the decree of destiny.  He
heaved a deep sigh of relief, and Sybil's name came to his lips.

'Have you dropped anything, sir?' said a voice behind him suddenly.

He turned round, and saw a policeman with a bull's-eye lantern.

'Nothing of importance, sergeant,' he answered, smiling, and hailing a
passing hansom, he jumped in, and told the man to drive to Belgrave
Square.

For the next few days he alternated between hope and fear.  There were
moments when he almost expected Mr. Podgers to walk into the room, and
yet at other times he felt that Fate could not be so unjust to him.
Twice he went to the cheiromantist's address in West Moon Street, but he
could not bring himself to ring the bell.  He longed for certainty, and
was afraid of it.

Finally it came.  He was sitting in the smoking-room of the club having
tea, and listening rather wearily to Surbiton's account of the last comic
song at the Gaiety, when the waiter came in with the evening papers.  He
took up the _St. James's_, and was listlessly turning over its pages,
when this strange heading caught his eye:

                         SUICIDE OF A CHEIROMANTIST.

He turned pale with excitement, and began to read.  The paragraph ran as
follows:

    Yesterday morning, at seven o'clock, the body of Mr. Septimus R.
    Podgers, the eminent cheiromantist, was washed on shore at Greenwich,
    just in front of the Ship Hotel.  The unfortunate gentleman had been
    missing for some days, and considerable anxiety for his safety had
    been felt in cheiromantic circles.  It is supposed that he committed
    suicide under the influence of a temporary mental derangement, caused
    by overwork, and a verdict to that effect was returned this afternoon
    by the coroner's jury.  Mr. Podgers had just completed an elaborate
    treatise on the subject of the Human Hand, that will shortly be
    published, when it will no doubt attract much attention.  The
    deceased was sixty-five years of age, and does not seem to have left
    any relations.

Lord Arthur rushed out of the club with the paper still in his hand, to
the immense amazement of the hall-porter, who tried in vain to stop him,
and drove at once to Park Lane.  Sybil saw him from the window, and
something told her that he was the bearer of good news.  She ran down to
meet him, and, when she saw his face, she knew that all was well.

'My dear Sybil,' cried Lord Arthur, 'let us be married to-morrow!'

'You foolish boy!  Why, the cake is not even ordered!' said Sybil,
laughing through her tears.



CHAPTER VI


WHEN the wedding took place, some three weeks later, St. Peter's was
crowded with a perfect mob of smart people.  The service was read in the
most impressive manner by the Dean of Chichester, and everybody agreed
that they had never seen a handsomer couple than the bride and
bridegroom.  They were more than handsome, however-they were happy.
Never for a single moment did Lord Arthur regret all that he had suffered
for Sybil's sake, while she, on her side, gave him the best things a
woman can give to any man-worship, tenderness, and love.  For them
romance was not killed by reality.  They always felt young.

Some years afterwards, when two beautiful children had been born to them,
Lady Windermere came down on a visit to Alton Priory, a lovely old place,
that had been the Duke's wedding present to his son; and one afternoon as
she was sitting with Lady Arthur under a lime-tree in the garden,
watching the little boy and girl as they played up and down the
rose-walk, like fitful sunbeams, she suddenly took her hostess's hand in
hers, and said, 'Are you happy, Sybil?'

'Dear Lady Windermere, of course I am happy.  Aren't you?'

'I have no time to be happy, Sybil.  I always like the last person who is
introduced to me; but, as a rule, as soon as I know people I get tired of
them.'

'Don't your lions satisfy you, Lady Windermere?'

'Oh dear, no! lions are only good for one season.  As soon as their manes
are cut, they are the dullest creatures going.  Besides, they behave very
badly, if you are really nice to them.  Do you remember that horrid Mr.
Podgers?  He was a dreadful impostor.  Of course, I didn't mind that at
all, and even when he wanted to borrow money I forgave him, but I could
not stand his making love to me.  He has really made me hate cheiromancy.
I go in for telepathy now.  It is much more amusing.'

'You mustn't say anything against cheiromancy here, Lady Windermere; it
is the only subject that Arthur does not like people to chaff about.  I
assure you he is quite serious over it.'

'You don't mean to say that he believes in it, Sybil?'

'Ask him, Lady Windermere, here he is'; and Lord Arthur came up the
garden with a large bunch of yellow roses in his hand, and his two
children dancing round him.

'Lord Arthur?'

'Yes, Lady Windermere.'

'You don't mean to say that you believe in cheiromancy?'

'Of course I do,' said the young man, smiling.

'But why?'

'Because I owe to it all the happiness of my life,' he murmured, throwing
himself into a wicker chair.

'My dear Lord Arthur, what do you owe to it?'

'Sybil,' he answered, handing his wife the roses, and looking into her
violet eyes.

'What nonsense!' cried Lady Windermere.  'I never heard such nonsense in
all my life.'




THE CANTERVILLE GHOST
A HYLO-IDEALISTIC ROMANCE


CHAPTER I


WHEN Mr. Hiram B. Otis, the American Minister, bought Canterville Chase,
every one told him he was doing a very foolish thing, as there was no
doubt at all that the place was haunted.  Indeed, Lord Canterville
himself, who was a man of the most punctilious honour, had felt it his
duty to mention the fact to Mr. Otis when they came to discuss terms.

'We have not cared to live in the place ourselves,' said Lord
Canterville, 'since my grandaunt, the Dowager Duchess of Bolton, was
frightened into a fit, from which she never really recovered, by two
skeleton hands being placed on her shoulders as she was dressing for
dinner, and I feel bound to tell you, Mr. Otis, that the ghost has been
seen by several living members of my family, as well as by the rector of
the parish, the Rev. Augustus Dampier, who is a Fellow of King's College,
Cambridge.  After the unfortunate accident to the Duchess, none of our
younger servants would stay with us, and Lady Canterville often got very
little sleep at night, in consequence of the mysterious noises that came
from the corridor and the library.'

'My Lord,' answered the Minister, 'I will take the furniture and the
ghost at a valuation.  I come from a modern country, where we have
everything that money can buy; and with all our spry young fellows
painting the Old World red, and carrying off your best actresses and
prima-donnas, I reckon that if there were such a thing as a ghost in
Europe, we'd have it at home in a very short time in one of our public
museums, or on the road as a show.'

'I fear that the ghost exists,' said Lord Canterville, smiling, 'though
it may have resisted the overtures of your enterprising impresarios.  It
has been well known for three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and always
makes its appearance before the death of any member of our family.'

'Well, so does the family doctor for that matter, Lord Canterville.  But
there is no such thing, sir, as a ghost, and I guess the laws of Nature
are not going to be suspended for the British aristocracy.'

'You are certainly very natural in America,' answered Lord Canterville,
who did not quite understand Mr. Otis's last observation, 'and if you
don't mind a ghost in the house, it is all right.  Only you must remember
I warned you.'

A few weeks after this, the purchase was completed, and at the close of
the season the Minister and his family went down to Canterville Chase.
Mrs. Otis, who, as Miss Lucretia R. Tappan, of West 53rd Street, had been
a celebrated New York belle, was now a very handsome, middle-aged woman,
with fine eyes, and a superb profile.  Many American ladies on leaving
their native land adopt an appearance of chronic ill-health, under the
impression that it is a form of European refinement, but Mrs. Otis had
never fallen into this error.  She had a magnificent constitution, and a
really wonderful amount of animal spirits.  Indeed, in many respects, she
was quite English, and was an excellent example of the fact that we have
really everything in common with America nowadays, except, of course,
language.  Her eldest son, christened Washington by his parents in a
moment of patriotism, which he never ceased to regret, was a fair-haired,
rather good-looking young man, who had qualified himself for American
diplomacy by leading the German at the Newport Casino for three
successive seasons, and even in London was well known as an excellent
dancer.  Gardenias and the peerage were his only weaknesses.  Otherwise
he was extremely sensible.  Miss Virginia E. Otis was a little girl of
fifteen, lithe and lovely as a fawn, and with a fine freedom in her large
blue eyes.  She was a wonderful amazon, and had once raced old Lord
Bilton on her pony twice round the park, winning by a length and a half,
just in front of the Achilles statue, to the huge delight of the young
Duke of Cheshire, who proposed for her on the spot, and was sent back to
Eton that very night by his guardians, in floods of tears.  After
Virginia came the twins, who were usually called 'The Stars and Stripes,'
as they were always getting swished.  They were delightful boys, and with
the exception of the worthy Minister the only true republicans of the
family.

As Canterville Chase is seven miles from Ascot, the nearest railway
station, Mr. Otis had telegraphed for a waggonette to meet them, and they
started on their drive in high spirits.  It was a lovely July evening,
and the air was delicate with the scent of the pine-woods.  Now and then
they heard a wood pigeon brooding over its own sweet voice, or saw, deep
in the rustling fern, the burnished breast of the pheasant.  Little
squirrels peered at them from the beech-trees as they went by, and the
rabbits scudded away through the brushwood and over the mossy knolls,
with their white tails in the air.  As they entered the avenue of
Canterville Chase, however, the sky became suddenly overcast with clouds,
a curious stillness seemed to hold the atmosphere, a great flight of
rooks passed silently over their heads, and, before they reached the
house, some big drops of rain had fallen.

Standing on the steps to receive them was an old woman, neatly dressed in
black silk, with a white cap and apron.  This was Mrs. Umney, the
housekeeper, whom Mrs. Otis, at Lady Canterville's earnest request, had
consented to keep on in her former position.  She made them each a low
curtsey as they alighted, and said in a quaint, old-fashioned manner, 'I
bid you welcome to Canterville Chase.'  Following her, they passed
through the fine Tudor hall into the library, a long, low room, panelled
in black oak, at the end of which was a large stained-glass window.  Here
they found tea laid out for them, and, after taking off their wraps, they
sat down and began to look round, while Mrs. Umney waited on them.

Suddenly Mrs. Otis caught sight of a dull red stain on the floor just by
the fireplace and, quite unconscious of what it really signified, said to
Mrs. Umney, 'I am afraid something has been spilt there.'

'Yes, madam,' replied the old housekeeper in a low voice, 'blood has been
spilt on that spot.'

'How horrid,' cried Mrs. Otis; 'I don't at all care for blood-stains in a
sitting-room.  It must be removed at once.'

The old woman smiled, and answered in the same low, mysterious voice, 'It
is the blood of Lady Eleanore de Canterville, who was murdered on that
very spot by her own husband, Sir Simon de Canterville, in 1575.  Sir
Simon survived her nine years, and disappeared suddenly under very
mysterious circumstances.  His body has never been discovered, but his
guilty spirit still haunts the Chase.  The blood-stain has been much
admired by tourists and others, and cannot be removed.'

'That is all nonsense,' cried Washington Otis; 'Pinkerton's Champion
Stain Remover and Paragon Detergent will clean it up in no time,' and
before the terrified housekeeper could interfere he had fallen upon his
knees, and was rapidly scouring the floor with a small stick of what
looked like a black cosmetic.  In a few moments no trace of the
blood-stain could be seen.

'I knew Pinkerton would do it,' he exclaimed triumphantly, as he looked
round at his admiring family; but no sooner had he said these words than
a terrible flash of lightning lit up the sombre room, a fearful peal of
thunder made them all start to their feet, and Mrs. Umney fainted.

'What a monstrous climate!' said the American Minister calmly, as he lit
a long cheroot.  'I guess the old country is so overpopulated that they
have not enough decent weather for everybody.  I have always been of
opinion that emigration is the only thing for England.'

'My dear Hiram,' cried Mrs. Otis, 'what can we do with a woman who
faints?'

'Charge it to her like breakages,' answered the Minister; 'she won't
faint after that'; and in a few moments Mrs. Umney certainly came to.
There was no doubt, however, that she was extremely upset, and she
sternly warned Mr. Otis to beware of some trouble coming to the house.

'I have seen things with my own eyes, sir,' she said, 'that would make
any Christian's hair stand on end, and many and many a night I have not
closed my eyes in sleep for the awful things that are done here.'  Mr.
Otis, however, and his wife warmly assured the honest soul that they were
not afraid of ghosts, and, after invoking the blessings of Providence on
her new master and mistress, and making arrangements for an increase of
salary, the old housekeeper tottered off to her own room.



CHAPTER II


THE storm raged fiercely all that night, but nothing of particular note
occurred.  The next morning, however, when they came down to breakfast,
they found the terrible stain of blood once again on the floor.  'I don't
think it can be the fault of the Paragon Detergent,' said Washington,
'for I have tried it with everything.  It must be the ghost.'  He
accordingly rubbed out the stain a second time, but the second morning it
appeared again.  The third morning also it was there, though the library
had been locked up at night by Mr. Otis himself, and the key carried
upstairs.  The whole family were now quite interested; Mr. Otis began to
suspect that he had been too dogmatic in his denial of the existence of
ghosts, Mrs. Otis expressed her intention of joining the Psychical
Society, and Washington prepared a long letter to Messrs. Myers and
Podmore on the subject of the Permanence of Sanguineous Stains when
connected with Crime.  That night all doubts about the objective
existence of phantasmata were removed for ever.

The day had been warm and sunny; and, in the cool of the evening, the
whole family went out for a drive.  They did not return home till nine
o'clock, when they had a light supper.  The conversation in no way turned
upon ghosts, so there were not even those primary conditions of receptive
expectation which so often precede the presentation of psychical
phenomena.  The subjects discussed, as I have since learned from Mr.
Otis, were merely such as form the ordinary conversation of cultured
Americans of the better class, such as the immense superiority of Miss
Fanny Davenport over Sarah Bernhardt as an actress; the difficulty of
obtaining green corn, buckwheat cakes, and hominy, even in the best
English houses; the importance of Boston in the development of the
world-soul; the advantages of the baggage check system in railway
travelling; and the sweetness of the New York accent as compared to the
London drawl.  No mention at all was made of the supernatural, nor was
Sir Simon de Canterville alluded to in any way.  At eleven o'clock the
family retired, and by half-past all the lights were out.  Some time
after, Mr. Otis was awakened by a curious noise in the corridor, outside
his room.  It sounded like the clank of metal, and seemed to be coming
nearer every moment.  He got up at once, struck a match, and looked at
the time.  It was exactly one o'clock.  He was quite calm, and felt his
pulse, which was not at all feverish.  The strange noise still continued,
and with it he heard distinctly the sound of footsteps.  He put on his
slippers, took a small oblong phial out of his dressing-case, and opened
the door.  Right in front of him he saw, in the wan moonlight, an old man
of terrible aspect.  His eyes were as red burning coals; long grey hair
fell over his shoulders in matted coils; his garments, which were of
antique cut, were soiled and ragged, and from his wrists and ankles hung
heavy manacles and rusty gyves.

'My dear sir,' said Mr. Otis, 'I really must insist on your oiling those
chains, and have brought you for that purpose a small bottle of the
Tammany Rising Sun Lubricator.  It is said to be completely efficacious
upon one application, and there are several testimonials to that effect
on the wrapper from some of our most eminent native divines.  I shall
leave it here for you by the bedroom candles, and will be happy to supply
you with more should you require it.'  With these words the United States
Minister laid the bottle down on a marble table, and, closing his door,
retired to rest.

For a moment the Canterville ghost stood quite motionless in natural
indignation; then, dashing the bottle violently upon the polished floor,
he fled down the corridor, uttering hollow groans, and emitting a ghastly
green light.  Just, however, as he reached the top of the great oak
staircase, a door was flung open, two little white-robed figures
appeared, and a large pillow whizzed past his head!  There was evidently
no time to be lost, so, hastily adopting the Fourth Dimension of Space as
a means of escape, he vanished through the wainscoting, and the house
became quite quiet.

On reaching a small secret chamber in the left wing, he leaned up against
a moonbeam to recover his breath, and began to try and realise his
position.  Never, in a brilliant and uninterrupted career of three
hundred years, had he been so grossly insulted.  He thought of the
Dowager Duchess, whom he had frightened into a fit as she stood before
the glass in her lace and diamonds; of the four housemaids, who had gone
off into hysterics when he merely grinned at them through the curtains of
one of the spare bedrooms; of the rector of the parish, whose candle he
had blown out as he was coming late one night from the library, and who
had been under the care of Sir William Gull ever since, a perfect martyr
to nervous disorders; and of old Madame de Tremouillac, who, having
wakened up one morning early and seen a skeleton seated in an arm-chair
by the fire reading her diary, had been confined to her bed for six weeks
with an attack of brain fever, and, on her recovery, had become
reconciled to the Church, and broken off her connection with that
notorious sceptic Monsieur de Voltaire.  He remembered the terrible night
when the wicked Lord Canterville was found choking in his dressing-room,
with the knave of diamonds half-way down his throat, and confessed, just
before he died, that he had cheated Charles James Fox out of lb50,000 at
Crockford's by means of that very card, and swore that the ghost had made
him swallow it.  All his great achievements came back to him again, from
the butler who had shot himself in the pantry because he had seen a green
hand tapping at the window pane, to the beautiful Lady Stutfield, who was
always obliged to wear a black velvet band round her throat to hide the
mark of five fingers burnt upon her white skin, and who drowned herself
at last in the carp-pond at the end of the King's Walk.  With the
enthusiastic egotism of the true artist he went over his most celebrated
performances, and smiled bitterly to himself as he recalled to mind his
last appearance as 'Red Ruben, or the Strangled Babe,' his _d'ebut_ as
'Gaunt Gibeon, the Blood-sucker of Bexley Moor,' and the _furore_ he had
excited one lovely June evening by merely playing ninepins with his own
bones upon the lawn-tennis ground.  And after all this, some wretched
modern Americans were to come and offer him the Rising Sun Lubricator,
and throw pillows at his head!  It was quite unbearable.  Besides, no
ghosts in history had ever been treated in this manner.  Accordingly, he
determined to have vengeance, and remained till daylight in an attitude
of deep thought.



CHAPTER III


THE next morning when the Otis family met at breakfast, they discussed
the ghost at some length.  The United States Minister was naturally a
little annoyed to find that his present had not been accepted.  'I have
no wish,' he said, 'to do the ghost any personal injury, and I must say
that, considering the length of time he has been in the house, I don't
think it is at all polite to throw pillows at him'-a very just remark, at
which, I am sorry to say, the twins burst into shouts of laughter.  'Upon
the other hand,' he continued, 'if he really declines to use the Rising
Sun Lubricator, we shall have to take his chains from him.  It would be
quite impossible to sleep, with such a noise going on outside the
bedrooms.'

For the rest of the week, however, they were undisturbed, the only thing
that excited any attention being the continual renewal of the blood-stain
on the library floor.  This certainly was very strange, as the door was
always locked at night by Mr. Otis, and the windows kept closely barred.
The chameleon-like colour, also, of the stain excited a good deal of
comment.  Some mornings it was a dull (almost Indian) red, then it would
be vermilion, then a rich purple, and once when they came down for family
prayers, according to the simple rites of the Free American Reformed
Episcopalian Church, they found it a bright emerald-green.  These
kaleidoscopic changes naturally amused the party very much, and bets on
the subject were freely made every evening.  The only person who did not
enter into the joke was little Virginia, who, for some unexplained
reason, was always a good deal distressed at the sight of the
blood-stain, and very nearly cried the morning it was emerald-green.

The second appearance of the ghost was on Sunday night.  Shortly after
they had gone to bed they were suddenly alarmed by a fearful crash in the
hall.  Rushing downstairs, they found that a large suit of old armour had
become detached from its stand, and had fallen on the stone floor, while,
seated in a high-backed chair, was the Canterville ghost, rubbing his
knees with an expression of acute agony on his face.  The twins, having
brought their pea-shooters with them, at once discharged two pellets on
him, with that accuracy of aim which can only be attained by long and
careful practice on a writing-master, while the United States Minister
covered him with his revolver, and called upon him, in accordance with
Californian etiquette, to hold up his hands!  The ghost started up with a
wild shriek of rage, and swept through them like a mist, extinguishing
Washington Otis's candle as he passed, and so leaving them all in total
darkness.  On reaching the top of the staircase he recovered himself, and
determined to give his celebrated peal of demoniac laughter.  This he had
on more than one occasion found extremely useful.  It was said to have
turned Lord Raker's wig grey in a single night, and had certainly made
three of Lady Canterville's French governesses give warning before their
month was up.  He accordingly laughed his most horrible laugh, till the
old vaulted roof rang and rang again, but hardly had the fearful echo
died away when a door opened, and Mrs. Otis came out in a light blue
dressing-gown.  'I am afraid you are far from well,' she said, 'and have
brought you a bottle of Dr. Dobell's tincture.  If it is indigestion, you
will find it a most excellent remedy.'  The ghost glared at her in fury,
and began at once to make preparations for turning himself into a large
black dog, an accomplishment for which he was justly renowned, and to
which the family doctor always attributed the permanent idiocy of Lord
Canterville's uncle, the Hon. Thomas Horton.  The sound of approaching
footsteps, however, made him hesitate in his fell purpose, so he
contented himself with becoming faintly phosphorescent, and vanished with
a deep churchyard groan, just as the twins had come up to him.

On reaching his room he entirely broke down, and became a prey to the
most violent agitation.  The vulgarity of the twins, and the gross
materialism of Mrs. Otis, were naturally extremely annoying, but what
really distressed him most was, that he had been unable to wear the suit
of mail.  He had hoped that even modern Americans would be thrilled by
the sight of a Spectre In Armour, if for no more sensible reason, at
least out of respect for their national poet Longfellow, over whose
graceful and attractive poetry he himself had whiled away many a weary
hour when the Cantervilles were up in town.  Besides, it was his own
suit.  He had worn it with great success at the Kenilworth tournament,
and had been highly complimented on it by no less a person than the
Virgin Queen herself.  Yet when he had put it on, he had been completely
overpowered by the weight of the huge breastplate and steel casque, and
had fallen heavily on the stone pavement, barking both his knees
severely, and bruising the knuckles of his right hand.

For some days after this he was extremely ill, and hardly stirred out of
his room at all, except to keep the blood-stain in proper repair.
However, by taking great care of himself, he recovered, and resolved to
make a third attempt to frighten the United States Minister and his
family.  He selected Friday, the 17th of August, for his appearance, and
spent most of that day in looking over his wardrobe, ultimately deciding
in favour of a large slouched hat with a red feather, a winding-sheet
frilled at the wrists and neck, and a rusty dagger.  Towards evening a
violent storm of rain came on, and the wind was so high that all the
windows and doors in the old house shook and rattled.  In fact, it was
just such weather as he loved.  His plan of action was this.  He was to
make his way quietly to Washington Otis's room, gibber at him from the
foot of the bed, and stab himself three times in the throat to the sound
of slow music.  He bore Washington a special grudge, being quite aware
that it was he who was in the habit of removing the famous Canterville
blood-stain, by means of Pinkerton's Paragon Detergent.  Having reduced
the reckless and foolhardy youth to a condition of abject terror, he was
then to proceed to the room occupied by the United States Minister and
his wife, and there to place a clammy hand on Mrs. Otis's forehead, while
he hissed into her trembling husband's ear the awful secrets of the
charnel-house.  With regard to little Virginia, he had not quite made up
his mind.  She had never insulted him in any way, and was pretty and
gentle.  A few hollow groans from the wardrobe, he thought, would be more
than sufficient, or, if that failed to wake her, he might grabble at the
counterpane with palsy-twitching fingers.  As for the twins, he was quite
determined to teach them a lesson.  The first thing to be done was, of
course, to sit upon their chests, so as to produce the stifling sensation
of nightmare.  Then, as their beds were quite close to each other, to
stand between them in the form of a green, icy-cold corpse, till they
became paralysed with fear, and finally, to throw off the winding-sheet,
and crawl round the room, with white bleached bones and one rolling
eye-ball, in the character of 'Dumb Daniel, or the Suicide's Skeleton,' a
_r^ole_ in which he had on more than one occasion produced a great effect,
and which he considered quite equal to his famous part of 'Martin the
Maniac, or the Masked Mystery.'

At half-past ten he heard the family going to bed.  For some time he was
disturbed by wild shrieks of laughter from the twins, who, with the
light-hearted gaiety of schoolboys, were evidently amusing themselves
before they retired to rest, but at a quarter past eleven all was still,
and, as midnight sounded, he sallied forth.  The owl beat against the
window panes, the raven croaked from the old yew-tree, and the wind
wandered moaning round the house like a lost soul; but the Otis family
slept unconscious of their doom, and high above the rain and storm he
could hear the steady snoring of the Minister for the United States.  He
stepped stealthily out of the wainscoting, with an evil smile on his
cruel, wrinkled mouth, and the moon hid her face in a cloud as he stole
past the great oriel window, where his own arms and those of his murdered
wife were blazoned in azure and gold.  On and on he glided, like an evil
shadow, the very darkness seeming to loathe him as he passed.  Once he
thought he heard something call, and stopped; but it was only the baying
of a dog from the Red Farm, and he went on, muttering strange
sixteenth-century curses, and ever and anon brandishing the rusty dagger
in the midnight air.  Finally he reached the corner of the passage that
led to luckless Washington's room.  For a moment he paused there, the
wind blowing his long grey locks about his head, and twisting into
grotesque and fantastic folds the nameless horror of the dead man's
shroud.  Then the clock struck the quarter, and he felt the time was
come.  He chuckled to himself, and turned the corner; but no sooner had
he done so, than, with a piteous wail of terror, he fell back, and hid
his blanched face in his long, bony hands.  Right in front of him was
standing a horrible spectre, motionless as a carven image, and monstrous
as a madman's dream!  Its head was bald and burnished; its face round,
and fat, and white; and hideous laughter seemed to have writhed its
features into an eternal grin.  From the eyes streamed rays of scarlet
light, the mouth was a wide well of fire, and a hideous garment, like to
his own, swathed with its silent snows the Titan form.  On its breast was
a placard with strange writing in antique characters, some scroll of
shame it seemed, some record of wild sins, some awful calendar of crime,
and, with its right hand, it bore aloft a falchion of gleaming steel.

Never having seen a ghost before, he naturally was terribly frightened,
and, after a second hasty glance at the awful phantom, he fled back to
his room, tripping up in his long winding-sheet as he sped down the
corridor, and finally dropping the rusty dagger into the Minister's
jack-boots, where it was found in the morning by the butler.  Once in the
privacy of his own apartment, he flung himself down on a small
pallet-bed, and hid his face under the clothes.  After a time, however,
the brave old Canterville spirit asserted itself, and he determined to go
and speak to the other ghost as soon as it was daylight.  Accordingly,
just as the dawn was touching the hills with silver, he returned towards
the spot where he had first laid eyes on the grisly phantom, feeling
that, after all, two ghosts were better than one, and that, by the aid of
his new friend, he might safely grapple with the twins.  On reaching the
spot, however, a terrible sight met his gaze.  Something had evidently
happened to the spectre, for the light had entirely faded from its hollow
eyes, the gleaming falchion had fallen from its hand, and it was leaning
up against the wall in a strained and uncomfortable attitude.  He rushed
forward and seized it in his arms, when, to his horror, the head slipped
off and rolled on the floor, the body assumed a recumbent posture, and he
found himself clasping a white dimity bed-curtain, with a sweeping-brush,
a kitchen cleaver, and a hollow turnip lying at his feet!  Unable to
understand this curious transformation, he clutched the placard with
feverish haste, and there, in the grey morning light, he read these
fearful words:-

                                YE OLDE GHOSTE

                      Ye Onlie True and Originale Spook.
                          Beware of Ye Imitationes.
                         All others are Counterfeite.

The whole thing flashed across him.  He had been tricked, foiled, and
outwitted!  The old Canterville look came into his eyes; he ground his
toothless gums together; and, raising his withered hands high above his
head, swore, according to the picturesque phraseology of the antique
school, that when Chanticleer had sounded twice his merry horn, deeds of
blood would be wrought, and Murder walk abroad with silent feet.

Hardly had he finished this awful oath when, from the red-tiled roof of a
distant homestead, a cock crew.  He laughed a long, low, bitter laugh,
and waited.  Hour after hour he waited, but the cock, for some strange
reason, did not crow again.  Finally, at half-past seven, the arrival of
the housemaids made him give up his fearful vigil, and he stalked back to
his room, thinking of his vain hope and baffled purpose.  There he
consulted several books of ancient chivalry, of which he was exceedingly
fond, and found that, on every occasion on which his oath had been used,
Chanticleer had always crowed a second time.  'Perdition seize the
naughty fowl,' he muttered, 'I have seen the day when, with my stout
spear, I would have run him through the gorge, and made him crow for me
an 'twere in death!'  He then retired to a comfortable lead coffin, and
stayed there till evening.



CHAPTER IV


THE next day the ghost was very weak and tired.  The terrible excitement
of the last four weeks was beginning to have its effect.  His nerves were
completely shattered, and he started at the slightest noise.  For five
days he kept his room, and at last made up his mind to give up the point
of the blood-stain on the library floor.  If the Otis family did not want
it, they clearly did not deserve it.  They were evidently people on a
low, material plane of existence, and quite incapable of appreciating the
symbolic value of sensuous phenomena.  The question of phantasmic
apparitions, and the development of astral bodies, was of course quite a
different matter, and really not under his control.  It was his solemn
duty to appear in the corridor once a week, and to gibber from the large
oriel window on the first and third Wednesday in every month, and he did
not see how he could honourably escape from his obligations.  It is quite
true that his life had been very evil, but, upon the other hand, he was
most conscientious in all things connected with the supernatural.  For
the next three Saturdays, accordingly, he traversed the corridor as usual
between midnight and three o'clock, taking every possible precaution
against being either heard or seen.  He removed his boots, trod as
lightly as possible on the old worm-eaten boards, wore a large black
velvet cloak, and was careful to use the Rising Sun Lubricator for oiling
his chains.  I am bound to acknowledge that it was with a good deal of
difficulty that he brought himself to adopt this last mode of protection.
However, one night, while the family were at dinner, he slipped into Mr.
Otis's bedroom and carried off the bottle.  He felt a little humiliated
at first, but afterwards was sensible enough to see that there was a
great deal to be said for the invention, and, to a certain degree, it
served his purpose.  Still, in spite of everything, he was not left
unmolested.  Strings were continually being stretched across the
corridor, over which he tripped in the dark, and on one occasion, while
dressed for the part of 'Black Isaac, or the Huntsman of Hogley Woods,'
he met with a severe fall, through treading on a butter-slide, which the
twins had constructed from the entrance of the Tapestry Chamber to the
top of the oak staircase.  This last insult so enraged him, that he
resolved to make one final effort to assert his dignity and social
position, and determined to visit the insolent young Etonians the next
night in his celebrated character of 'Reckless Rupert, or the Headless
Earl.'

He had not appeared in this disguise for more than seventy years; in
fact, not since he had so frightened pretty Lady Barbara Modish by means
of it, that she suddenly broke off her engagement with the present Lord
Canterville's grandfather, and ran away to Gretna Green with handsome
Jack Castleton, declaring that nothing in the world would induce her to
marry into a family that allowed such a horrible phantom to walk up and
down the terrace at twilight.  Poor Jack was afterwards shot in a duel by
Lord Canterville on Wandsworth Common, and Lady Barbara died of a broken
heart at Tunbridge Wells before the year was out, so, in every way, it
had been a great success.  It was, however, an extremely difficult
'make-up,' if I may use such a theatrical expression in connection with
one of the greatest mysteries of the supernatural, or, to employ a more
scientific term, the higher-natural world, and it took him fully three
hours to make his preparations.  At last everything was ready, and he was
very pleased with his appearance.  The big leather riding-boots that went
with the dress were just a little too large for him, and he could only
find one of the two horse-pistols, but, on the whole, he was quite
satisfied, and at a quarter past one he glided out of the wainscoting and
crept down the corridor.  On reaching the room occupied by the twins,
which I should mention was called the Blue Bed Chamber, on account of the
colour of its hangings, he found the door just ajar.  Wishing to make an
effective entrance, he flung it wide open, when a heavy jug of water fell
right down on him, wetting him to the skin, and just missing his left
shoulder by a couple of inches.  At the same moment he heard stifled
shrieks of laughter proceeding from the four-post bed.  The shock to his
nervous system was so great that he fled back to his room as hard as he
could go, and the next day he was laid up with a severe cold.  The only
thing that at all consoled him in the whole affair was the fact that he
had not brought his head with him, for, had he done so, the consequences
might have been very serious.

He now gave up all hope of ever frightening this rude American family,
and contented himself, as a rule, with creeping about the passages in
list slippers, with a thick red muffler round his throat for fear of
draughts, and a small arquebuse, in case he should be attacked by the
twins.  The final blow he received occurred on the 19th of September.  He
had gone downstairs to the great entrance-hall, feeling sure that there,
at any rate, he would be quite unmolested, and was amusing himself by
making satirical remarks on the large Saroni photographs of the United
States Minister and his wife, which had now taken the place of the
Canterville family pictures.  He was simply but neatly clad in a long
shroud, spotted with churchyard mould, had tied up his jaw with a strip
of yellow linen, and carried a small lantern and a sexton's spade.  In
fact, he was dressed for the character of 'Jonas the Graveless, or the
Corpse-Snatcher of Chertsey Barn,' one of his most remarkable
impersonations, and one which the Cantervilles had every reason to
remember, as it was the real origin of their quarrel with their
neighbour, Lord Rufford.  It was about a quarter past two o'clock in the
morning, and, as far as he could ascertain, no one was stirring.  As he
was strolling towards the library, however, to see if there were any
traces left of the blood-stain, suddenly there leaped out on him from a
dark corner two figures, who waved their arms wildly above their heads,
and shrieked out 'BOO!' in his ear.

Seized with a panic, which, under the circumstances, was only natural, he
rushed for the staircase, but found Washington Otis waiting for him there
with the big garden-syringe; and being thus hemmed in by his enemies on
every side, and driven almost to bay, he vanished into the great iron
stove, which, fortunately for him, was not lit, and had to make his way
home through the flues and chimneys, arriving at his own room in a
terrible state of dirt, disorder, and despair.

After this he was not seen again on any nocturnal expedition.  The twins
lay in wait for him on several occasions, and strewed the passages with
nutshells every night to the great annoyance of their parents and the
servants, but it was of no avail.  It was quite evident that his feelings
were so wounded that he would not appear.  Mr. Otis consequently resumed
his great work on the history of the Democratic Party, on which he had
been engaged for some years; Mrs. Otis organised a wonderful clam-bake,
which amazed the whole county; the boys took to lacrosse, euchre, poker,
and other American national games; and Virginia rode about the lanes on
her pony, accompanied by the young Duke of Cheshire, who had come to
spend the last week of his holidays at Canterville Chase.  It was
generally assumed that the ghost had gone away, and, in fact, Mr. Otis
wrote a letter to that effect to Lord Canterville, who, in reply,
expressed his great pleasure at the news, and sent his best
congratulations to the Minister's worthy wife.

The Otises, however, were deceived, for the ghost was still in the house,
and though now almost an invalid, was by no means ready to let matters
rest, particularly as he heard that among the guests was the young Duke
of Cheshire, whose grand-uncle, Lord Francis Stilton, had once bet a
hundred guineas with Colonel Carbury that he would play dice with the
Canterville ghost, and was found the next morning lying on the floor of
the card-room in such a helpless paralytic state, that though he lived on
to a great age, he was never able to say anything again but 'Double
Sixes.'  The story was well known at the time, though, of course, out of
respect to the feelings of the two noble families, every attempt was made
to hush it up; and a full account of all the circumstances connected with
it will be found in the third volume of Lord Tattle's _Recollections of
the Prince Regent and his Friends_.  The ghost, then, was naturally very
anxious to show that he had not lost his influence over the Stiltons,
with whom, indeed, he was distantly connected, his own first cousin
having been married _en secondes noces_ to the Sieur de Bulkeley, from
whom, as every one knows, the Dukes of Cheshire are lineally descended.
Accordingly, he made arrangements for appearing to Virginia's little
lover in his celebrated impersonation of 'The Vampire Monk, or, the
Bloodless Benedictine,' a performance so horrible that when old Lady
Startup saw it, which she did on one fatal New Year's Eve, in the year
1764, she went off into the most piercing shrieks, which culminated in
violent apoplexy, and died in three days, after disinheriting the
Cantervilles, who were her nearest relations, and leaving all her money
to her London apothecary.  At the last moment, however, his terror of the
twins prevented his leaving his room, and the little Duke slept in peace
under the great feathered canopy in the Royal Bedchamber, and dreamed of
Virginia.



CHAPTER V


A FEW days after this, Virginia and her curly-haired cavalier went out
riding on Brockley meadows, where she tore her habit so badly in getting
through a hedge, that, on her return home, she made up her mind to go up
by the back staircase so as not to be seen.  As she was running past the
Tapestry Chamber, the door of which happened to be open, she fancied she
saw some one inside, and thinking it was her mother's maid, who sometimes
used to bring her work there, looked in to ask her to mend her habit.  To
her immense surprise, however, it was the Canterville Ghost himself!  He
was sitting by the window, watching the ruined gold of the yellowing
trees fly through the air, and the red leaves dancing madly down the long
avenue.  His head was leaning on his hand, and his whole attitude was one
of extreme depression.  Indeed, so forlorn, and so much out of repair did
he look, that little Virginia, whose first idea had been to run away and
lock herself in her room, was filled with pity, and determined to try and
comfort him.  So light was her footfall, and so deep his melancholy, that
he was not aware of her presence till she spoke to him.

'I am so sorry for you,' she said, 'but my brothers are going back to
Eton to-morrow, and then, if you behave yourself, no one will annoy you.'

'It is absurd asking me to behave myself,' he answered, looking round in
astonishment at the pretty little girl who had ventured to address him,
'quite absurd.  I must rattle my chains, and groan through keyholes, and
walk about at night, if that is what you mean.  It is my only reason for
existing.'

'It is no reason at all for existing, and you know you have been very
wicked.  Mrs. Umney told us, the first day we arrived here, that you had
killed your wife.'

'Well, I quite admit it,' said the Ghost petulantly, 'but it was a purely
family matter, and concerned no one else.'

'It is very wrong to kill any one,' said Virginia, who at times had a
sweet Puritan gravity, caught from some old New England ancestor.

'Oh, I hate the cheap severity of abstract ethics!  My wife was very
plain, never had my ruffs properly starched, and knew nothing about
cookery.  Why, there was a buck I had shot in Hogley Woods, a magnificent
pricket, and do you know how she had it sent up to table?  However, it is
no matter now, for it is all over, and I don't think it was very nice of
her brothers to starve me to death, though I did kill her.'

'Starve you to death?  Oh, Mr. Ghost, I mean Sir Simon, are you hungry?
I have a sandwich in my case.  Would you like it?'

'No, thank you, I never eat anything now; but it is very kind of you, all
the same, and you are much nicer than the rest of your horrid, rude,
vulgar, dishonest family.'

'Stop!' cried Virginia, stamping her foot, 'it is you who are rude, and
horrid, and vulgar, and as for dishonesty, you know you stole the paints
out of my box to try and furbish up that ridiculous blood-stain in the
library.  First you took all my reds, including the vermilion, and I
couldn't do any more sunsets, then you took the emerald-green and the
chrome-yellow, and finally I had nothing left but indigo and Chinese
white, and could only do moonlight scenes, which are always depressing to
look at, and not at all easy to paint.  I never told on you, though I was
very much annoyed, and it was most ridiculous, the whole thing; for who
ever heard of emerald-green blood?'

'Well, really,' said the Ghost, rather meekly, 'what was I to do?  It is
a very difficult thing to get real blood nowadays, and, as your brother
began it all with his Paragon Detergent, I certainly saw no reason why I
should not have your paints.  As for colour, that is always a matter of
taste: the Cantervilles have blue blood, for instance, the very bluest in
England; but I know you Americans don't care for things of this kind.'

'You know nothing about it, and the best thing you can do is to emigrate
and improve your mind.  My father will be only too happy to give you a
free passage, and though there is a heavy duty on spirits of every kind,
there will be no difficulty about the Custom House, as the officers are
all Democrats.  Once in New York, you are sure to be a great success.  I
know lots of people there who would give a hundred thousand dollars to
have a grandfather, and much more than that to have a family Ghost.'

'I don't think I should like America.'

'I suppose because we have no ruins and no curiosities,' said Virginia
satirically.

'No ruins! no curiosities!' answered the Ghost; 'you have your navy and
your manners.'

'Good evening; I will go and ask papa to get the twins an extra week's
holiday.'

'Please don't go, Miss Virginia,' he cried; 'I am so lonely and so
unhappy, and I really don't know what to do.  I want to go to sleep and I
cannot.'

'That's quite absurd!  You have merely to go to bed and blow out the
candle.  It is very difficult sometimes to keep awake, especially at
church, but there is no difficulty at all about sleeping.  Why, even
babies know how to do that, and they are not very clever.'

'I have not slept for three hundred years,' he said sadly, and Virginia's
beautiful blue eyes opened in wonder; 'for three hundred years I have not
slept, and I am so tired.'

Virginia grew quite grave, and her little lips trembled like rose-leaves.
She came towards him, and kneeling down at his side, looked up into his
old withered face.

'Poor, poor Ghost,' she murmured; 'have you no place where you can
sleep?'

'Far away beyond the pine-woods,' he answered, in a low dreamy voice,
'there is a little garden.  There the grass grows long and deep, there
are the great white stars of the hemlock flower, there the nightingale
sings all night long.  All night long he sings, and the cold, crystal
moon looks down, and the yew-tree spreads out its giant arms over the
sleepers.'

Virginia's eyes grew dim with tears, and she hid her face in her hands.

'You mean the Garden of Death,' she whispered.

'Yes, Death.  Death must be so beautiful.  To lie in the soft brown
earth, with the grasses waving above one's head, and listen to silence.
To have no yesterday, and no to-morrow.  To forget time, to forgive life,
to be at peace.  You can help me.  You can open for me the portals of
Death's house, for Love is always with you, and Love is stronger than
Death is.'

Virginia trembled, a cold shudder ran through her, and for a few moments
there was silence.  She felt as if she was in a terrible dream.

Then the Ghost spoke again, and his voice sounded like the sighing of the
wind.

'Have you ever read the old prophecy on the library window?'

'Oh, often,' cried the little girl, looking up; 'I know it quite well.
It is painted in curious black letters, and it is difficult to read.
There are only six lines:

    When a golden girl can win
    Prayer from out the lips of sin,
    When the barren almond bears,
    And a little child gives away its tears,
    Then shall all the house be still
    And peace come to Canterville.

But I don't know what they mean.'

'They mean,' he said sadly, 'that you must weep for me for my sins,
because I have no tears, and pray with me for my soul, because I have no
faith, and then, if you have always been sweet, and good, and gentle, the
Angel of Death will have mercy on me.  You will see fearful shapes in
darkness, and wicked voices will whisper in your ear, but they will not
harm you, for against the purity of a little child the powers of Hell
cannot prevail.'

Virginia made no answer, and the Ghost wrung his hands in wild despair as
he looked down at her bowed golden head.  Suddenly she stood up, very
pale, and with a strange light in her eyes.  'I am not afraid,' she said
firmly, 'and I will ask the Angel to have mercy on you.'

He rose from his seat with a faint cry of joy, and taking her hand bent
over it with old-fashioned grace and kissed it.  His fingers were as cold
as ice, and his lips burned like fire, but Virginia did not falter, as he
led her across the dusky room.  On the faded green tapestry were
broidered little huntsmen.  They blew their tasselled horns and with
their tiny hands waved to her to go back.  'Go back! little Virginia,'
they cried, 'go back!' but the Ghost clutched her hand more tightly, and
she shut her eyes against them.  Horrible animals with lizard tails, and
goggle eyes, blinked at her from the carven chimney-piece, and murmured
'Beware! little Virginia, beware! we may never see you again,' but the
Ghost glided on more swiftly, and Virginia did not listen.  When they
reached the end of the room he stopped, and muttered some words she could
not understand.  She opened her eyes, and saw the wall slowly fading away
like a mist, and a great black cavern in front of her.  A bitter cold
wind swept round them, and she felt something pulling at her dress.
'Quick, quick,' cried the Ghost, 'or it will be too late,' and, in a
moment, the wainscoting had closed behind them, and the Tapestry Chamber
was empty.



CHAPTER VI


ABOUT ten minutes later, the bell rang for tea, and, as Virginia did not
come down, Mrs. Otis sent up one of the footmen to tell her.  After a
little time he returned and said that he could not find Miss Virginia
anywhere.  As she was in the habit of going out to the garden every
evening to get flowers for the dinner-table, Mrs. Otis was not at all
alarmed at first, but when six o'clock struck, and Virginia did not
appear, she became really agitated, and sent the boys out to look for
her, while she herself and Mr. Otis searched every room in the house.  At
half-past six the boys came back and said that they could find no trace
of their sister anywhere.  They were all now in the greatest state of
excitement, and did not know what to do, when Mr. Otis suddenly
remembered that, some few days before, he had given a band of gypsies
permission to camp in the park.  He accordingly at once set off for
Blackfell Hollow, where he knew they were, accompanied by his eldest son
and two of the farm-servants.  The little Duke of Cheshire, who was
perfectly frantic with anxiety, begged hard to be allowed to go too, but
Mr. Otis would not allow him, as he was afraid there might be a scuffle.
On arriving at the spot, however, he found that the gypsies had gone, and
it was evident that their departure had been rather sudden, as the fire
was still burning, and some plates were lying on the grass.  Having sent
off Washington and the two men to scour the district, he ran home, and
despatched telegrams to all the police inspectors in the county, telling
them to look out for a little girl who had been kidnapped by tramps or
gypsies.  He then ordered his horse to be brought round, and, after
insisting on his wife and the three boys sitting down to dinner, rode off
down the Ascot Road with a groom.  He had hardly, however, gone a couple
of miles when he heard somebody galloping after him, and, looking round,
saw the little Duke coming up on his pony, with his face very flushed and
no hat.  'I'm awfully sorry, Mr. Otis,' gasped out the boy, 'but I can't
eat any dinner as long as Virginia is lost.  Please, don't be angry with
me; if you had let us be engaged last year, there would never have been
all this trouble.  You won't send me back, will you?  I can't go!  I
won't go!'

The Minister could not help smiling at the handsome young scapegrace, and
was a good deal touched at his devotion to Virginia, so leaning down from
his horse, he patted him kindly on the shoulders, and said, 'Well, Cecil,
if you won't go back I suppose you must come with me, but I must get you
a hat at Ascot.'

'Oh, bother my hat!  I want Virginia!' cried the little Duke, laughing,
and they galloped on to the railway station.  There Mr. Otis inquired of
the station-master if any one answering the description of Virginia had
been seen on the platform, but could get no news of her.  The
station-master, however, wired up and down the line, and assured him that
a strict watch would be kept for her, and, after having bought a hat for
the little Duke from a linen-draper, who was just putting up his
shutters, Mr. Otis rode off to Bexley, a village about four miles away,
which he was told was a well-known haunt of the gypsies, as there was a
large common next to it.  Here they roused up the rural policeman, but
could get no information from him, and, after riding all over the common,
they turned their horses' heads homewards, and reached the Chase about
eleven o'clock, dead-tired and almost heart-broken.  They found
Washington and the twins waiting for them at the gate-house with
lanterns, as the avenue was very dark.  Not the slightest trace of
Virginia had been discovered.  The gypsies had been caught on Brockley
meadows, but she was not with them, and they had explained their sudden
departure by saying that they had mistaken the date of Chorton Fair, and
had gone off in a hurry for fear they might be late.  Indeed, they had
been quite distressed at hearing of Virginia's disappearance, as they
were very grateful to Mr. Otis for having allowed them to camp in his
park, and four of their number had stayed behind to help in the search.
The carp-pond had been dragged, and the whole Chase thoroughly gone over,
but without any result.  It was evident that, for that night at any rate,
Virginia was lost to them; and it was in a state of the deepest
depression that Mr. Otis and the boys walked up to the house, the groom
following behind with the two horses and the pony.  In the hall they
found a group of frightened servants, and lying on a sofa in the library
was poor Mrs. Otis, almost out of her mind with terror and anxiety, and
having her forehead bathed with eau-de-cologne by the old housekeeper.
Mr. Otis at once insisted on her having something to eat, and ordered up
supper for the whole party.  It was a melancholy meal, as hardly any one
spoke, and even the twins were awestruck and subdued, as they were very
fond of their sister.  When they had finished, Mr. Otis, in spite of the
entreaties of the little Duke, ordered them all to bed, saying that
nothing more could be done that night, and that he would telegraph in the
morning to Scotland Yard for some detectives to be sent down immediately.
Just as they were passing out of the dining-room, midnight began to boom
from the clock tower, and when the last stroke sounded they heard a crash
and a sudden shrill cry; a dreadful peal of thunder shook the house, a
strain of unearthly music floated through the air, a panel at the top of
the staircase flew back with a loud noise, and out on the landing,
looking very pale and white, with a little casket in her hand, stepped
Virginia.  In a moment they had all rushed up to her.  Mrs. Otis clasped
her passionately in her arms, the Duke smothered her with violent kisses,
and the twins executed a wild war-dance round the group.

'Good heavens! child, where have you been?' said Mr. Otis, rather
angrily, thinking that she had been playing some foolish trick on them.
'Cecil and I have been riding all over the country looking for you, and
your mother has been frightened to death.  You must never play these
practical jokes any more.'

'Except on the Ghost! except on the Ghost!' shrieked the twins, as they
capered about.

'My own darling, thank God you are found; you must never leave my side
again,' murmured Mrs. Otis, as she kissed the trembling child, and
smoothed the tangled gold of her hair.

'Papa,' said Virginia quietly, 'I have been with the Ghost.  He is dead,
and you must come and see him.  He had been very wicked, but he was
really sorry for all that he had done, and he gave me this box of
beautiful jewels before he died.'

The whole family gazed at her in mute amazement, but she was quite grave
and serious; and, turning round, she led them through the opening in the
wainscoting down a narrow secret corridor, Washington following with a
lighted candle, which he had caught up from the table.  Finally, they
came to a great oak door, studded with rusty nails.  When Virginia
touched it, it swung back on its heavy hinges, and they found themselves
in a little low room, with a vaulted ceiling, and one tiny grated window.
Imbedded in the wall was a huge iron ring, and chained to it was a gaunt
skeleton, that was stretched out at full length on the stone floor, and
seemed to be trying to grasp with its long fleshless fingers an
old-fashioned trencher and ewer, that were placed just out of its reach.
The jug had evidently been once filled with water, as it was covered
inside with green mould.  There was nothing on the trencher but a pile of
dust.  Virginia knelt down beside the skeleton, and, folding her little
hands together, began to pray silently, while the rest of the party
looked on in wonder at the terrible tragedy whose secret was now
disclosed to them.

'Hallo!' suddenly exclaimed one of the twins, who had been looking out of
the window to try and discover in what wing of the house the room was
situated.  'Hallo! the old withered almond-tree has blossomed.  I can see
the flowers quite plainly in the moonlight.'

'God has forgiven him,' said Virginia gravely, as she rose to her feet,
and a beautiful light seemed to illumine her face.

'What an angel you are!' cried the young Duke, and he put his arm round
her neck and kissed her.



CHAPTER VII


FOUR days after these curious incidents a funeral started from
Canterville Chase at about eleven o'clock at night.  The hearse was drawn
by eight black horses, each of which carried on its head a great tuft of
nodding ostrich-plumes, and the leaden coffin was covered by a rich
purple pall, on which was embroidered in gold the Canterville
coat-of-arms.  By the side of the hearse and the coaches walked the
servants with lighted torches, and the whole procession was wonderfully
impressive.  Lord Canterville was the chief mourner, having come up
specially from Wales to attend the funeral, and sat in the first carriage
along with little Virginia.  Then came the United States Minister and his
wife, then Washington and the three boys, and in the last carriage was
Mrs. Umney.  It was generally felt that, as she had been frightened by
the ghost for more than fifty years of her life, she had a right to see
the last of him.  A deep grave had been dug in the corner of the
churchyard, just under the old yew-tree, and the service was read in the
most impressive manner by the Rev. Augustus Dampier.  When the ceremony
was over, the servants, according to an old custom observed in the
Canterville family, extinguished their torches, and, as the coffin was
being lowered into the grave, Virginia stepped forward and laid on it a
large cross made of white and pink almond-blossoms.  As she did so, the
moon came out from behind a cloud, and flooded with its silent silver the
little churchyard, and from a distant copse a nightingale began to sing.
She thought of the ghost's description of the Garden of Death, her eyes
became dim with tears, and she hardly spoke a word during the drive home.

The next morning, before Lord Canterville went up to town, Mr. Otis had
an interview with him on the subject of the jewels the ghost had given to
Virginia.  They were perfectly magnificent, especially a certain ruby
necklace with old Venetian setting, which was really a superb specimen of
sixteenth-century work, and their value was so great that Mr. Otis felt
considerable scruples about allowing his daughter to accept them.

'My lord,' he said, 'I know that in this country mortmain is held to
apply to trinkets as well as to land, and it is quite clear to me that
these jewels are, or should be, heirlooms in your family.  I must beg
you, accordingly, to take them to London with you, and to regard them
simply as a portion of your property which has been restored to you under
certain strange conditions.  As for my daughter, she is merely a child,
and has as yet, I am glad to say, but little interest in such
appurtenances of idle luxury.  I am also informed by Mrs. Otis, who, I
may say, is no mean authority upon Art-having had the privilege of
spending several winters in Boston when she was a girl-that these gems
are of great monetary worth, and if offered for sale would fetch a tall
price.  Under these circumstances, Lord Canterville, I feel sure that you
will recognise how impossible it would be for me to allow them to remain
in the possession of any member of my family; and, indeed, all such vain
gauds and toys, however suitable or necessary to the dignity of the
British aristocracy, would be completely out of place among those who
have been brought up on the severe, and I believe immortal, principles of
republican simplicity.  Perhaps I should mention that Virginia is very
anxious that you should allow her to retain the box as a memento of your
unfortunate but misguided ancestor.  As it is extremely old, and
consequently a good deal out of repair, you may perhaps think fit to
comply with her request.  For my own part, I confess I am a good deal
surprised to find a child of mine expressing sympathy with mediaevalism in
any form, and can only account for it by the fact that Virginia was born
in one of your London suburbs shortly after Mrs. Otis had returned from a
trip to Athens.'

Lord Canterville listened very gravely to the worthy Minister's speech,
pulling his grey moustache now and then to hide an involuntary smile, and
when Mr. Otis had ended, he shook him cordially by the hand, and said,
'My dear sir, your charming little daughter rendered my unlucky ancestor,
Sir Simon, a very important service, and I and my family are much
indebted to her for her marvellous courage and pluck.  The jewels are
clearly hers, and, egad, I believe that if I were heartless enough to
take them from her, the wicked old fellow would be out of his grave in a
fortnight, leading me the devil of a life.  As for their being heirlooms,
nothing is an heirloom that is not so mentioned in a will or legal
document, and the existence of these jewels has been quite unknown.  I
assure you I have no more claim on them than your butler, and when Miss
Virginia grows up I daresay she will be pleased to have pretty things to
wear.  Besides, you forget, Mr. Otis, that you took the furniture and the
ghost at a valuation, and anything that belonged to the ghost passed at
once into your possession, as, whatever activity Sir Simon may have shown
in the corridor at night, in point of law he was really dead, and you
acquired his property by purchase.'

Mr. Otis was a good deal distressed at Lord Canterville's refusal, and
begged him to reconsider his decision, but the good-natured peer was
quite firm, and finally induced the Minister to allow his daughter to
retain the present the ghost had given her, and when, in the spring of
1890, the young Duchess of Cheshire was presented at the Queen's first
drawing-room on the occasion of her marriage, her jewels were the
universal theme of admiration.  For Virginia received the coronet, which
is the reward of all good little American girls, and was married to her
boy-lover as soon as he came of age.  They were both so charming, and
they loved each other so much, that every one was delighted at the match,
except the old Marchioness of Dumbleton, who had tried to catch the Duke
for one of her seven unmarried daughters, and had given no less than
three expensive dinner-parties for that purpose, and, strange to say, Mr.
Otis himself.  Mr. Otis was extremely fond of the young Duke personally,
but, theoretically, he objected to titles, and, to use his own words,
'was not without apprehension lest, amid the enervating influences of a
pleasure-loving aristocracy, the true principles of republican simplicity
should be forgotten.'  His objections, however, were completely
overruled, and I believe that when he walked up the aisle of St.
George's, Hanover Square, with his daughter leaning on his arm, there was
not a prouder man in the whole length and breadth of England.

The Duke and Duchess, after the honeymoon was over, went down to
Canterville Chase, and on the day after their arrival they walked over in
the afternoon to the lonely churchyard by the pine-woods.  There had been
a great deal of difficulty at first about the inscription on Sir Simon's
tombstone, but finally it had been decided to engrave on it simply the
initials of the old gentleman's name, and the verse from the library
window.  The Duchess had brought with her some lovely roses, which she
strewed upon the grave, and after they had stood by it for some time they
strolled into the ruined chancel of the old abbey.  There the Duchess sat
down on a fallen pillar, while her husband lay at her feet smoking a
cigarette and looking up at her beautiful eyes.  Suddenly he threw his
cigarette away, took hold of her hand, and said to her, 'Virginia, a wife
should have no secrets from her husband.'

'Dear Cecil!  I have no secrets from you.'

'Yes, you have,' he answered, smiling, 'you have never told me what
happened to you when you were locked up with the ghost.'

'I have never told any one, Cecil,' said Virginia gravely.

'I know that, but you might tell me.'

'Please don't ask me, Cecil, I cannot tell you.  Poor Sir Simon!  I owe
him a great deal.  Yes, don't laugh, Cecil, I really do.  He made me see
what Life is, and what Death signifies, and why Love is stronger than
both.'

The Duke rose and kissed his wife lovingly.

'You can have your secret as long as I have your heart,' he murmured.

'You have always had that, Cecil.'

'And you will tell our children some day, won't you?'

Virginia blushed.




THE SPHINX WITHOUT A SECRET
AN ETCHING


ONE afternoon I was sitting outside the Caf'e de la Paix, watching the
splendour and shabbiness of Parisian life, and wondering over my vermouth
at the strange panorama of pride and poverty that was passing before me,
when I heard some one call my name.  I turned round, and saw Lord
Murchison.  We had not met since we had been at college together, nearly
ten years before, so I was delighted to come across him again, and we
shook hands warmly.  At Oxford we had been great friends.  I had liked
him immensely, he was so handsome, so high-spirited, and so honourable.
We used to say of him that he would be the best of fellows, if he did not
always speak the truth, but I think we really admired him all the more
for his frankness.  I found him a good deal changed.  He looked anxious
and puzzled, and seemed to be in doubt about something.  I felt it could
not be modern scepticism, for Murchison was the stoutest of Tories, and
believed in the Pentateuch as firmly as he believed in the House of
Peers; so I concluded that it was a woman, and asked him if he was
married yet.

'I don't understand women well enough,' he answered.

'My dear Gerald,' I said, 'women are meant to be loved, not to be
understood.'

'I cannot love where I cannot trust,' he replied.

'I believe you have a mystery in your life, Gerald,' I exclaimed; 'tell
me about it.'

'Let us go for a drive,' he answered, 'it is too crowded here.  No, not a
yellow carriage, any other colour-there, that dark green one will do';
and in a few moments we were trotting down the boulevard in the direction
of the Madeleine.

'Where shall we go to?' I said.

'Oh, anywhere you like!' he answered-'to the restaurant in the Bois; we
will dine there, and you shall tell me all about yourself.'

'I want to hear about you first,' I said.  'Tell me your mystery.'

He took from his pocket a little silver-clasped morocco case, and handed
it to me.  I opened it.  Inside there was the photograph of a woman.  She
was tall and slight, and strangely picturesque with her large vague eyes
and loosened hair.  She looked like a _clairvoyante_, and was wrapped in
rich furs.

'What do you think of that face?' he said; 'is it truthful?'

I examined it carefully.  It seemed to me the face of some one who had a
secret, but whether that secret was good or evil I could not say.  Its
beauty was a beauty moulded out of many mysteries-the beauty, in fact,
which is psychological, not plastic-and the faint smile that just played
across the lips was far too subtle to be really sweet.

'Well,' he cried impatiently, 'what do you say?'

'She is the Gioconda in sables,' I answered.  'Let me know all about
her.'

'Not now,' he said; 'after dinner,' and began to talk of other things.

When the waiter brought us our coffee and cigarettes I reminded Gerald of
his promise.  He rose from his seat, walked two or three times up and
down the room, and, sinking into an armchair, told me the following
story:-

'One evening,' he said, 'I was walking down Bond Street about five
o'clock.  There was a terrific crush of carriages, and the traffic was
almost stopped.  Close to the pavement was standing a little yellow
brougham, which, for some reason or other, attracted my attention.  As I
passed by there looked out from it the face I showed you this afternoon.
It fascinated me immediately.  All that night I kept thinking of it, and
all the next day.  I wandered up and down that wretched Row, peering into
every carriage, and waiting for the yellow brougham; but I could not find
_ma belle inconnue_, and at last I began to think she was merely a dream.
About a week afterwards I was dining with Madame de Rastail.  Dinner was
for eight o'clock; but at half-past eight we were still waiting in the
drawing-room.  Finally the servant threw open the door, and announced
Lady Alroy.  It was the woman I had been looking for.  She came in very
slowly, looking like a moonbeam in grey lace, and, to my intense delight,
I was asked to take her in to dinner.  After we had sat down, I remarked
quite innocently, "I think I caught sight of you in Bond Street some time
ago, Lady Alroy."  She grew very pale, and said to me in a low voice,
"Pray do not talk so loud; you may be overheard."  I felt miserable at
having made such a bad beginning, and plunged recklessly into the subject
of the French plays.  She spoke very little, always in the same low
musical voice, and seemed as if she was afraid of some one listening.  I
fell passionately, stupidly in love, and the indefinable atmosphere of
mystery that surrounded her excited my most ardent curiosity.  When she
was going away, which she did very soon after dinner, I asked her if I
might call and see her.  She hesitated for a moment, glanced round to see
if any one was near us, and then said, "Yes; to-morrow at a quarter to
five."  I begged Madame de Rastail to tell me about her; but all that I
could learn was that she was a widow with a beautiful house in Park Lane,
and as some scientific bore began a dissertation on widows, as
exemplifying the survival of the matrimonially fittest, I left and went
home.

'The next day I arrived at Park Lane punctual to the moment, but was told
by the butler that Lady Alroy had just gone out.  I went down to the club
quite unhappy and very much puzzled, and after long consideration wrote
her a letter, asking if I might be allowed to try my chance some other
afternoon.  I had no answer for several days, but at last I got a little
note saying she would be at home on Sunday at four and with this
extraordinary postscript: "Please do not write to me here again; I will
explain when I see you."  On Sunday she received me, and was perfectly
charming; but when I was going away she begged of me, if I ever had
occasion to write to her again, to address my letter to "Mrs. Knox, care
of Whittaker's Library, Green Street."  "There are reasons," she said,
"why I cannot receive letters in my own house."

'All through the season I saw a great deal of her, and the atmosphere of
mystery never left her.  Sometimes I thought that she was in the power of
some man, but she looked so unapproachable, that I could not believe it.
It was really very difficult for me to come to any conclusion, for she
was like one of those strange crystals that one sees in museums, which
are at one moment clear, and at another clouded.  At last I determined to
ask her to be my wife: I was sick and tired of the incessant secrecy that
she imposed on all my visits, and on the few letters I sent her.  I wrote
to her at the library to ask her if she could see me the following Monday
at six.  She answered yes, and I was in the seventh heaven of delight.  I
was infatuated with her: in spite of the mystery, I thought then-in
consequence of it, I see now.  No; it was the woman herself I loved.  The
mystery troubled me, maddened me.  Why did chance put me in its track?'

'You discovered it, then?' I cried.

'I fear so,' he answered.  'You can judge for yourself.'

'When Monday came round I went to lunch with my uncle, and about four
o'clock found myself in the Marylebone Road.  My uncle, you know, lives
in Regent's Park.  I wanted to get to Piccadilly, and took a short cut
through a lot of shabby little streets.  Suddenly I saw in front of me
Lady Alroy, deeply veiled and walking very fast.  On coming to the last
house in the street, she went up the steps, took out a latch-key, and let
herself in.  "Here is the mystery," I said to myself; and I hurried on
and examined the house.  It seemed a sort of place for letting lodgings.
On the doorstep lay her handkerchief, which she had dropped.  I picked it
up and put it in my pocket.  Then I began to consider what I should do.
I came to the conclusion that I had no right to spy on her, and I drove
down to the club.  At six I called to see her.  She was lying on a sofa,
in a tea-gown of silver tissue looped up by some strange moonstones that
she always wore.  She was looking quite lovely.  "I am so glad to see
you," she said; "I have not been out all day."  I stared at her in
amazement, and pulling the handkerchief out of my pocket, handed it to
her.  "You dropped this in Cumnor Street this afternoon, Lady Alroy,"  I
said very calmly.  She looked at me in terror but made no attempt to take
the handkerchief.  "What were you doing there?" I asked.  "What right
have you to question me?" she answered.  "The right of a man who loves
you," I replied; "I came here to ask you to be my wife."  She hid her
face in her hands, and burst into floods of tears.  "You must tell me," I
continued.  She stood up, and, looking me straight in the face, said,
"Lord Murchison, there is nothing to tell you."-"You went to meet some
one," I cried; "this is your mystery."  She grew dreadfully white, and
said, "I went to meet no one."-"Can't you tell the truth?" I exclaimed.
"I have told it," she replied.  I was mad, frantic; I don't know what I
said, but I said terrible things to her.  Finally I rushed out of the
house.  She wrote me a letter the next day; I sent it back unopened, and
started for Norway with Alan Colville.  After a month I came back, and
the first thing I saw in the _Morning Post_ was the death of Lady Alroy.
She had caught a chill at the Opera, and had died in five days of
congestion of the lungs.  I shut myself up and saw no one.  I had loved
her so much, I had loved her so madly.  Good God! how I had loved that
woman!'

'You went to the street, to the house in it?' I said.

'Yes,' he answered.

'One day I went to Cumnor Street.  I could not help it; I was tortured
with doubt.  I knocked at the door, and a respectable-looking woman
opened it to me.  I asked her if she had any rooms to let.  "Well, sir,"
she replied, "the drawing-rooms are supposed to be let; but I have not
seen the lady for three months, and as rent is owing on them, you can
have them."-"Is this the lady?" I said, showing the photograph.  "That's
her, sure enough," she exclaimed; "and when is she coming back,
sir?"-"The lady is dead," I replied.  "Oh sir, I hope not!" said the
woman; "she was my best lodger.  She paid me three guineas a week merely
to sit in my drawing-rooms now and then."  "She met some one here?" I
said; but the woman assured me that it was not so, that she always came
alone, and saw no one.  "What on earth did she do here?" I cried.  "She
simply sat in the drawing-room, sir, reading books, and sometimes had
tea," the woman answered.  I did not know what to say, so I gave her a
sovereign and went away.  Now, what do you think it all meant?  You don't
believe the woman was telling the truth?'

'I do.'

'Then why did Lady Alroy go there?'

'My dear Gerald,' I answered, 'Lady Alroy was simply a woman with a mania
for mystery.  She took these rooms for the pleasure of going there with
her veil down, and imagining she was a heroine.  She had a passion for
secrecy, but she herself was merely a Sphinx without a secret.'

'Do you really think so?'

'I am sure of it,' I replied.

He took out the morocco case, opened it, and looked at the photograph.
'I wonder?' he said at last.




THE MODEL MILLIONAIRE
A NOTE OF ADMIRATION


UNLESS one is wealthy there is no use in being a charming fellow.
Romance is the privilege of the rich, not the profession of the
unemployed.  The poor should be practical and prosaic.  It is better to
have a permanent income than to be fascinating.  These are the great
truths of modern life which Hughie Erskine never realised.  Poor Hughie!
Intellectually, we must admit, he was not of much importance.  He never
said a brilliant or even an ill-natured thing in his life.  But then he
was wonderfully good-looking, with his crisp brown hair, his clear-cut
profile, and his grey eyes.  He was as popular with men as he was with
women and he had every accomplishment except that of making money.  His
father had bequeathed him his cavalry sword and a _History of the
Peninsular War_ in fifteen volumes.  Hughie hung the first over his
looking-glass, put the second on a shelf between _Ruff's Guide_ and
_Bailey's Magazine_, and lived on two hundred a year that an old aunt
allowed him.  He had tried everything.  He had gone on the Stock Exchange
for six months; but what was a butterfly to do among bulls and bears?  He
had been a tea-merchant for a little longer, but had soon tired of pekoe
and souchong.  Then he had tried selling dry sherry.  That did not
answer; the sherry was a little too dry.  Ultimately he became nothing, a
delightful, ineffectual young man with a perfect profile and no
profession.

To make matters worse, he was in love.  The girl he loved was Laura
Merton, the daughter of a retired Colonel who had lost his temper and his
digestion in India, and had never found either of them again.  Laura
adored him, and he was ready to kiss her shoe-strings.  They were the
handsomest couple in London, and had not a penny-piece between them.  The
Colonel was very fond of Hughie, but would not hear of any engagement.

'Come to me, my boy, when you have got ten thousand pounds of your own,
and we will see about it,' he used to say; and Hughie looked very glum in
those days, and had to go to Laura for consolation.

One morning, as he was on his way to Holland Park, where the Mertons
lived, he dropped in to see a great friend of his, Alan Trevor.  Trevor
was a painter.  Indeed, few people escape that nowadays.  But he was also
an artist, and artists are rather rare.  Personally he was a strange
rough fellow, with a freckled face and a red ragged beard.  However, when
he took up the brush he was a real master, and his pictures were eagerly
sought after.  He had been very much attracted by Hughie at first, it
must be acknowledged, entirely on account of his personal charm.  'The
only people a painter should know,' he used to say, 'are people who are
_b^ete_ and beautiful, people who are an artistic pleasure to look at and
an intellectual repose to talk to.  Men who are dandies and women who are
darlings rule the world, at least they should do so.'  However, after he
got to know Hughie better, he liked him quite as much for his bright,
buoyant spirits and his generous, reckless nature, and had given him the
permanent _entr'ee_ to his studio.

When Hughie came in he found Trevor putting the finishing touches to a
wonderful life-size picture of a beggar-man.  The beggar himself was
standing on a raised platform in a corner of the studio.  He was a
wizened old man, with a face like wrinkled parchment, and a most piteous
expression.  Over his shoulders was flung a coarse brown cloak, all tears
and tatters; his thick boots were patched and cobbled, and with one hand
he leant on a rough stick, while with the other he held out his battered
hat for alms.

'What an amazing model!' whispered Hughie, as he shook hands with his
friend.

'An amazing model?' shouted Trevor at the top of his voice; 'I should
think so!  Such beggars as he are not to be met with every day.  A
_trouvaille_, _mon cher_; a living Velasquez!  My stars! what an etching
Rembrandt would have made of him!'

'Poor old chap!' said Hughie, 'how miserable he looks!  But I suppose, to
you painters, his face is his fortune?'

'Certainly,' replied Trevor, 'you don't want a beggar to look happy, do
you?'

'How much does a model get for sitting?' asked Hughie, as he found
himself a comfortable seat on a divan.

'A shilling an hour.'

'And how much do you get for your picture, Alan?'

'Oh, for this I get two thousand!'

'Pounds?'

'Guineas.  Painters, poets, and physicians always get guineas.'

'Well, I think the model should have a percentage,' cried Hughie,
laughing; 'they work quite as hard as you do.'

'Nonsense, nonsense!  Why, look at the trouble of laying on the paint
alone, and standing all day long at one's easel!  It's all very well,
Hughie, for you to talk, but I assure you that there are moments when Art
almost attains to the dignity of manual labour.  But you mustn't chatter;
I'm very busy.  Smoke a cigarette, and keep quiet.'

After some time the servant came in, and told Trevor that the framemaker
wanted to speak to him.

'Don't run away, Hughie,' he said, as he went out, 'I will be back in a
moment.'

The old beggar-man took advantage of Trevor's absence to rest for a
moment on a wooden bench that was behind him.  He looked so forlorn and
wretched that Hughie could not help pitying him, and felt in his pockets
to see what money he had.  All he could find was a sovereign and some
coppers.  'Poor old fellow,' he thought to himself, 'he wants it more
than I do, but it means no hansoms for a fortnight'; and he walked across
the studio and slipped the sovereign into the beggar's hand.

The old man started, and a faint smile flitted across his withered lips.
'Thank you, sir,' he said, 'thank you.'

Then Trevor arrived, and Hughie took his leave, blushing a little at what
he had done.  He spent the day with Laura, got a charming scolding for
his extravagance, and had to walk home.

That night he strolled into the Palette Club about eleven o'clock, and
found Trevor sitting by himself in the smoking-room drinking hock and
seltzer.

'Well, Alan, did you get the picture finished all right?' he said, as he
lit his cigarette.

'Finished and framed, my boy!' answered Trevor; 'and, by the bye, you
have made a conquest.  That old model you saw is quite devoted to you.  I
had to tell him all about you-who you are, where you live, what your
income is, what prospects you have-'

'My dear Alan,' cried Hughie, 'I shall probably find him waiting for me
when I go home.  But of course you are only joking.  Poor old wretch!  I
wish I could do something for him.  I think it is dreadful that any one
should be so miserable.  I have got heaps of old clothes at home-do you
think he would care for any of them?  Why, his rags were falling to
bits.'

'But he looks splendid in them,' said Trevor.  'I wouldn't paint him in a
frock coat for anything.  What you call rags I call romance.  What seems
poverty to you is picturesqueness to me.  However, I'll tell him of your
offer.'

'Alan,' said Hughie seriously, 'you painters are a heartless lot.'

'An artist's heart is his head,' replied Trevor; 'and besides, our
business is to realise the world as we see it, not to reform it as we
know it.  _`A chacun son m'etier_.  And now tell me how Laura is.  The old
model was quite interested in her.'

'You don't mean to say you talked to him about her?' said Hughie.

'Certainly I did.  He knows all about the relentless colonel, the lovely
Laura, and the lb10,000.'

'You told that old beggar all my private affairs?' cried Hughie, looking
very red and angry.

'My dear boy,' said Trevor, smiling, 'that old beggar, as you call him,
is one of the richest men in Europe.  He could buy all London to-morrow
without overdrawing his account.  He has a house in every capital, dines
off gold plate, and can prevent Russia going to war when he chooses.'

'What on earth do you mean?' exclaimed Hughie.

'What I say,' said Trevor.  'The old man you saw to-day in the studio was
Baron Hausberg.  He is a great friend of mine, buys all my pictures and
that sort of thing, and gave me a commission a month ago to paint him as
a beggar.  _Que voulez-vous_?  _La fantaisie d'un millionnaire_!  And I
must say he made a magnificent figure in his rags, or perhaps I should
say in my rags; they are an old suit I got in Spain.'

'Baron Hausberg!' cried Hughie.  'Good heavens!  I gave him a sovereign!'
and he sank into an armchair the picture of dismay.

'Gave him a sovereign!' shouted Trevor, and he burst into a roar of
laughter.  'My dear boy, you'll never see it again.  _Son affaire c'est
l'argent des autres_.'

'I think you might have told me, Alan,' said Hughie sulkily, 'and not
have let me make such a fool of myself.'

'Well, to begin with, Hughie,' said Trevor, 'it never entered my mind
that you went about distributing alms in that reckless way.  I can
understand your kissing a pretty model, but your giving a sovereign to an
ugly one-by Jove, no!  Besides, the fact is that I really was not at home
to-day to any one; and when you came in I didn't know whether Hausberg
would like his name mentioned.  You know he wasn't in full dress.'

'What a duffer he must think me!' said Hughie.

'Not at all.  He was in the highest spirits after you left; kept
chuckling to himself and rubbing his old wrinkled hands together.  I
couldn't make out why he was so interested to know all about you; but I
see it all now.  He'll invest your sovereign for you, Hughie, pay you the
interest every six months, and have a capital story to tell after
dinner.'

'I am an unlucky devil,' growled Hughie.  'The best thing I can do is to
go to bed; and, my dear Alan, you mustn't tell any one.  I shouldn't dare
show my face in the Row.'

'Nonsense!  It reflects the highest credit on your philanthropic spirit,
Hughie.  And don't run away.  Have another cigarette, and you can talk
about Laura as much as you like.'

However, Hughie wouldn't stop, but walked home, feeling very unhappy, and
leaving Alan Trevor in fits of laughter.

The next morning, as he was at breakfast, the servant brought him up a
card on which was written, 'Monsieur Gustave Naudin, _de la part de_ M.
le Baron Hausberg.'  'I suppose he has come for an apology,' said Hughie
to himself; and he told the servant to show the visitor up.

An old gentleman with gold spectacles and grey hair came into the room,
and said, in a slight French accent, 'Have I the honour of addressing
Monsieur Erskine?'

Hughie bowed.

'I have come from Baron Hausberg,' he continued.  'The Baron-'

'I beg, sir, that you will offer him my sincerest apologies,' stammered
Hughie.

'The Baron,' said the old gentleman with a smile, 'has commissioned me to
bring you this letter'; and he extended a sealed envelope.

On the outside was written, 'A wedding present to Hugh Erskine and Laura
Merton, from an old beggar,' and inside was a cheque for lb10,000.

When they were married Alan Trevor was the best man, and the Baron made a
speech at the wedding breakfast.

'Millionaire models,' remarked Alan, 'are rare enough; but, by Jove,
model millionaires are rarer still!'




THE PORTRAIT OF MR. W. H.


CHAPTER I


I HAD been dining with Erskine in his pretty little house in Birdcage
Walk, and we were sitting in the library over our coffee and cigarettes,
when the question of literary forgeries happened to turn up in
conversation.  I cannot at present remember how it was that we struck
upon this somewhat curious topic, as it was at that time, but I know that
we had a long discussion about Macpherson, Ireland, and Chatterton, and
that with regard to the last I insisted that his so-called forgeries were
merely the result of an artistic desire for perfect representation; that
we had no right to quarrel with an artist for the conditions under which
he chooses to present his work; and that all Art being to a certain
degree a mode of acting, an attempt to realise one's own personality on
some imaginative plane out of reach of the trammelling accidents and
limitations of real life, to censure an artist for a forgery was to
confuse an ethical with an aesthetical problem.

Erskine, who was a good deal older than I was, and had been listening to
me with the amused deference of a man of forty, suddenly put his hand
upon my shoulder and said to me, 'What would you say about a young man
who had a strange theory about a certain work of art, believed in his
theory, and committed a forgery in order to prove it?'

'Ah! that is quite a different matter,' I answered.

Erskine remained silent for a few moments, looking at the thin grey
threads of smoke that were rising from his cigarette.  'Yes,' he said,
after a pause, 'quite different.'

There was something in the tone of his voice, a slight touch of
bitterness perhaps, that excited my curiosity.  'Did you ever know
anybody who did that?' I cried.

'Yes,' he answered, throwing his cigarette into the fire,-'a great friend
of mine, Cyril Graham.  He was very fascinating, and very foolish, and
very heartless.  However, he left me the only legacy I ever received in
my life.'

'What was that?' I exclaimed.  Erskine rose from his seat, and going over
to a tall inlaid cabinet that stood between the two windows, unlocked it,
and came back to where I was sitting, holding in his hand a small panel
picture set in an old and somewhat tarnished Elizabethan frame.

It was a full-length portrait of a young man in late sixteenth-century
costume, standing by a table, with his right hand resting on an open
book.  He seemed about seventeen years of age, and was of quite
extraordinary personal beauty, though evidently somewhat effeminate.
Indeed, had it not been for the dress and the closely cropped hair, one
would have said that the face with its dreamy wistful eyes, and its
delicate scarlet lips, was the face of a girl.  In manner, and especially
in the treatment of the hands, the picture reminded one of Francois
Clouet's later work.  The black velvet doublet with its fantastically
gilded points, and the peacock-blue background against which it showed up
so pleasantly, and from which it gained such luminous value of colour,
were quite in Clouet's style; and the two masks of Tragedy and Comedy
that hung somewhat formally from the marble pedestal had that hard
severity of touch-so different from the facile grace of the
Italians-which even at the Court of France the great Flemish master never
completely lost, and which in itself has always been a characteristic of
the northern temper.

'It is a charming thing,' I cried, 'but who is this wonderful young man,
whose beauty Art has so happily preserved for us?'

'This is the portrait of Mr. W. H.,' said Erskine, with a sad smile.  It
might have been a chance effect of light, but it seemed to me that his
eyes were quite bright with tears.

'Mr. W. H.!' I exclaimed; 'who was Mr. W. H.?'

'Don't you remember?' he answered; 'look at the book on which his hand is
resting.'

'I see there is some writing there, but I cannot make it out,' I replied.

'Take this magnifying-glass and try,' said Erskine, with the same sad
smile still playing about his mouth.

I took the glass, and moving the lamp a little nearer, I began to spell
out the crabbed sixteenth-century handwriting.  'To the onlie begetter of
these insuing sonnets.' . . . 'Good heavens!' I cried, 'is this
Shakespeare's Mr. W. H.?'

'Cyril Graham used to say so,' muttered Erskine.

'But it is not a bit like Lord Pembroke,' I answered.  'I know the
Penshurst portraits very well.  I was staying near there a few weeks
ago.'

'Do you really believe then that the sonnets are addressed to Lord
Pembroke?' he asked.

'I am sure of it,' I answered.  'Pembroke, Shakespeare, and Mrs. Mary
Fitton are the three personages of the Sonnets; there is no doubt at all
about it.'

'Well, I agree with you,' said Erskine, 'but I did not always think so.
I used to believe-well, I suppose I used to believe in Cyril Graham and
his theory.'

'And what was that?' I asked, looking at the wonderful portrait, which
had already begun to have a strange fascination for me.

'It is a long story,' said Erskine, taking the picture away from
me-rather abruptly I thought at the time-'a very long story; but if you
care to hear it, I will tell it to you.'

'I love theories about the Sonnets,' I cried; 'but I don't think I am
likely to be converted to any new idea.  The matter has ceased to be a
mystery to any one.  Indeed, I wonder that it ever was a mystery.'

'As I don't believe in the theory, I am not likely to convert you to it,'
said Erskine, laughing; 'but it may interest you.'

'Tell it to me, of course,' I answered.  'If it is half as delightful as
the picture, I shall be more than satisfied.'

'Well,' said Erskine, lighting a cigarette, 'I must begin by telling you
about Cyril Graham himself.  He and I were at the same house at Eton.  I
was a year or two older than he was, but we were immense friends, and did
all our work and all our play together.  There was, of course, a good
deal more play than work, but I cannot say that I am sorry for that.  It
is always an advantage not to have received a sound commercial education,
and what I learned in the playing fields at Eton has been quite as useful
to me as anything I was taught at Cambridge.  I should tell you that
Cyril's father and mother were both dead.  They had been drowned in a
horrible yachting accident off the Isle of Wight.  His father had been in
the diplomatic service, and had married a daughter, the only daughter, in
fact, of old Lord Crediton, who became Cyril's guardian after the death
of his parents.  I don't think that Lord Crediton cared very much for
Cyril.  He had never really forgiven his daughter for marrying a man who
had not a title.  He was an extraordinary old aristocrat, who swore like
a costermonger, and had the manners of a farmer.  I remember seeing him
once on Speech-day.  He growled at me, gave me a sovereign, and told me
not to grow up "a damned Radical" like my father.  Cyril had very little
affection for him, and was only too glad to spend most of his holidays
with us in Scotland.  They never really got on together at all.  Cyril
thought him a bear, and he thought Cyril effeminate.  He was effeminate,
I suppose, in some things, though he was a very good rider and a capital
fencer.  In fact he got the foils before he left Eton.  But he was very
languid in his manner, and not a little vain of his good looks, and had a
strong objection to football.  The two things that really gave him
pleasure were poetry and acting.  At Eton he was always dressing up and
reciting Shakespeare, and when we went up to Trinity he became a member
of the A.D.C. his first term.  I remember I was always very jealous of
his acting.  I was absurdly devoted to him; I suppose because we were so
different in some things.  I was a rather awkward, weakly lad, with huge
feet, and horribly freckled.  Freckles run in Scotch families just as
gout does in English families.  Cyril used to say that of the two he
preferred the gout; but he always set an absurdly high value on personal
appearance, and once read a paper before our debating society to prove
that it was better to be good-looking than to be good.  He certainly was
wonderfully handsome.  People who did not like him, Philistines and
college tutors, and young men reading for the Church, used to say that he
was merely pretty; but there was a great deal more in his face than mere
prettiness.  I think he was the most splendid creature I ever saw, and
nothing could exceed the grace of his movements, the charm of his manner.
He fascinated everybody who was worth fascinating, and a great many
people who were not.  He was often wilful and petulant, and I used to
think him dreadfully insincere.  It was due, I think, chiefly to his
inordinate desire to please.  Poor Cyril!  I told him once that he was
contented with very cheap triumphs, but he only laughed.  He was horribly
spoiled.  All charming people, I fancy, are spoiled.  It is the secret of
their attraction.

'However, I must tell you about Cyril's acting.  You know that no
actresses are allowed to play at the A.D.C.  At least they were not in my
time.  I don't know how it is now.  Well, of course, Cyril was always
cast for the girls' parts, and when _As You Like It_ was produced he
played Rosalind.  It was a marvellous performance.  In fact, Cyril Graham
was the only perfect Rosalind I have ever seen.  It would be impossible
to describe to you the beauty, the delicacy, the refinement of the whole
thing.  It made an immense sensation, and the horrid little theatre, as
it was then, was crowded every night.  Even when I read the play now I
can't help thinking of Cyril.  It might have been written for him.  The
next term he took his degree, and came to London to read for the
diplomatic.  But he never did any work.  He spent his days in reading
Shakespeare's Sonnets, and his evenings at the theatre.  He was, of
course, wild to go on the stage.  It was all that I and Lord Crediton
could do to prevent him.  Perhaps if he had gone on the stage he would be
alive now.  It is always a silly thing to give advice, but to give good
advice is absolutely fatal.  I hope you will never fall into that error.
If you do, you will be sorry for it.

'Well, to come to the real point of the story, one day I got a letter
from Cyril asking me to come round to his rooms that evening.  He had
charming chambers in Piccadilly overlooking the Green Park, and as I used
to go to see him every day, I was rather surprised at his taking the
trouble to write.  Of course I went, and when I arrived I found him in a
state of great excitement.  He told me that he had at last discovered the
true secret of Shakespeare's Sonnets; that all the scholars and critics
had been entirely on the wrong tack; and that he was the first who,
working purely by internal evidence, had found out who Mr. W. H. really
was.  He was perfectly wild with delight, and for a long time would not
tell me his theory.  Finally, he produced a bundle of notes, took his
copy of the Sonnets off the mantelpiece, and sat down and gave me a long
lecture on the whole subject.

'He began by pointing out that the young man to whom Shakespeare
addressed these strangely passionate poems must have been somebody who
was a really vital factor in the development of his dramatic art, and
that this could not be said either of Lord Pembroke or Lord Southampton.
Indeed, whoever he was, he could not have been anybody of high birth, as
was shown very clearly by the 25th Sonnet, in which Shakespeare
contrasting himself with those who are "great princes' favourites," says
quite frankly-

    Let those who are in favour with their stars
    Of public honour and proud titles boast,
    Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars,
    Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most.

And ends the sonnet by congratulating himself on the mean state of him he
so adored.

    Then happy I, that love and am beloved
    Where I may not remove nor be removed.

This sonnet Cyril declared would be quite unintelligible if we fancied
that it was addressed to either the Earl of Pembroke or the Earl of
Southampton, both of whom were men of the highest position in England and
fully entitled to be called "great princes"; and he in corroboration of
his view read me Sonnets CXXIV. and CXXV., in which Shakespeare tells us
that his love is not "the child of state," that it "suffers not in
smiling pomp," but is "builded far from accident."  I listened with a
good deal of interest, for I don't think the point had ever been made
before; but what followed was still more curious, and seemed to me at the
time to dispose entirely of Pembroke's claim.  We know from Meres that
the Sonnets had been written before 1598, and Sonnet CIV. informs us that
Shakespeare's friendship for Mr. W. H. had been already in existence for
three years.  Now Lord Pembroke, who was born in 1580, did not come to
London till he was eighteen years of age, that is to say till 1598, and
Shakespeare's acquaintance with Mr. W. H. must have begun in 1594, or at
the latest in 1595.  Shakespeare, accordingly, could not have known Lord
Pembroke till after the Sonnets had been written.

'Cyril pointed out also that Pembroke's father did not die till 1601;
whereas it was evident from the line,

    You had a father; let your son say so,

that the father of Mr. W. H. was dead in 1598.  Besides, it was absurd to
imagine that any publisher of the time, and the preface is from the
publisher's hand, would have ventured to address William Herbert, Earl of
Pembroke, as Mr. W. H.; the case of Lord Buckhurst being spoken of as Mr.
Sackville being not really a parallel instance, as Lord Buckhurst was not
a peer, but merely the younger son of a peer, with a courtesy title, and
the passage in _England's Parnassus_, where he is so spoken of, is not a
formal and stately dedication, but simply a casual allusion.  So far for
Lord Pembroke, whose supposed claims Cyril easily demolished while I sat
by in wonder.  With Lord Southampton Cyril had even less difficulty.
Southampton became at a very early age the lover of Elizabeth Vernon, so
he needed no entreaties to marry; he was not beautiful; he did not
resemble his mother, as Mr. W. H. did-

    Thou art thy mother's glass, and she in thee
    Calls back the lovely April of her prime;

and, above all, his Christian name was Henry, whereas the punning sonnets
(CXXXV. and CXLIII.) show that the Christian name of Shakespeare's friend
was the same as his own-_Will_.

'As for the other suggestions of unfortunate commentators, that Mr. W. H.
is a misprint for Mr. W. S., meaning Mr. William Shakespeare; that "Mr.
W. H. all" should be read "Mr. W. Hall"; that Mr. W. H. is Mr. William
Hathaway; and that a full stop should be placed after "wisheth," making
Mr. W. H. the writer and not the subject of the dedication,-Cyril got rid
of them in a very short time; and it is not worth while to mention his
reasons, though I remember he sent me off into a fit of laughter by
reading to me, I am glad to say not in the original, some extracts from a
German commentator called Barnstorff, who insisted that Mr. W. H. was no
less a person than "Mr. William Himself."  Nor would he allow for a
moment that the Sonnets are mere satires on the work of Drayton and John
Davies of Hereford.  To him, as indeed to me, they were poems of serious
and tragic import, wrung out of the bitterness of Shakespeare's heart,
and made sweet by the honey of his lips.  Still less would he admit that
they were merely a philosophical allegory, and that in them Shakespeare
is addressing his Ideal Self, or Ideal Manhood, or the Spirit of Beauty,
or the Reason, or the Divine Logos, or the Catholic Church.  He felt, as
indeed I think we all must feel, that the Sonnets are addressed to an
individual,-to a particular young man whose personality for some reason
seems to have filled the soul of Shakespeare with terrible joy and no
less terrible despair.

'Having in this manner cleared the way as it were, Cyril asked me to
dismiss from my mind any preconceived ideas I might have formed on the
subject, and to give a fair and unbiassed hearing to his own theory.  The
problem he pointed out was this: Who was that young man of Shakespeare's
day who, without being of noble birth or even of noble nature, was
addressed by him in terms of such passionate adoration that we can but
wonder at the strange worship, and are almost afraid to turn the key that
unlocks the mystery of the poet's heart?  Who was he whose physical
beauty was such that it became the very corner-stone of Shakespeare's
art; the very source of Shakespeare's inspiration; the very incarnation
of Shakespeare's dreams?  To look upon him as simply the object of
certain love-poems is to miss the whole meaning of the poems: for the art
of which Shakespeare talks in the Sonnets is not the art of the Sonnets
themselves, which indeed were to him but slight and secret things-it is
the art of the dramatist to which he is always alluding; and he to whom
Shakespeare said-

          Thou art all my art, and dost advance
    As high as learning my rude ignorance,

he to whom he promised immortality,

    Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men,-

was surely none other than the boy-actor for whom he created Viola and
Imogen, Juliet and Rosalind, Portia and Desdemona, and Cleopatra herself.
This was Cyril Graham's theory, evolved as you see purely from the
Sonnets themselves, and depending for its acceptance not so much on
demonstrable proof or formal evidence, but on a kind of spiritual and
artistic sense, by which alone he claimed could the true meaning of the
poems be discerned.  I remember his reading to me that fine sonnet-

    How can my Muse want subject to invent,
    While thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse
    Thine own sweet argument, too excellent
    For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
    O, give thyself the thanks, if aught in me
    Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;
    For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee,
    When thou thyself dost give invention light?
    Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
    Than those old nine which rhymers invocate;
    And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
    Eternal numbers to outlive long date-

and pointing out how completely it corroborated his theory; and indeed he
went through all the Sonnets carefully, and showed, or fancied that he
showed, that, according to his new explanation of their meaning, things
that had seemed obscure, or evil, or exaggerated, became clear and
rational, and of high artistic import, illustrating Shakespeare's
conception of the true relations between the art of the actor and the art
of the dramatist.

'It is of course evident that there must have been in Shakespeare's
company some wonderful boy-actor of great beauty, to whom he intrusted
the presentation of his noble heroines; for Shakespeare was a practical
theatrical manager as well as an imaginative poet, and Cyril Graham had
actually discovered the boy-actor's name.  He was Will, or, as he
preferred to call him, Willie Hughes.  The Christian name he found of
course in the punning sonnets, CXXXV. and CXLIII.; the surname was,
according to him, hidden in the seventh line of the 20th Sonnet, where
Mr. W. H. is described as-

    A man in hew, all _Hews_ in his controwling.

'In the original edition of the Sonnets "Hews" is printed with a capital
letter and in italics, and this, he claimed, showed clearly that a play
on words was intended, his view receiving a good deal of corroboration
from those sonnets in which curious puns are made on the words "use" and
"usury."  Of course I was converted at once, and Willie Hughes became to
me as real a person as Shakespeare.  The only objection I made to the
theory was that the name of Willie Hughes does not occur in the list of
the actors of Shakespeare's company as it is printed in the first folio.
Cyril, however, pointed out that the absence of Willie Hughes's name from
this list really corroborated the theory, as it was evident from Sonnet
LXXXVI. that Willie Hughes had abandoned Shakespeare's company to play at
a rival theatre, probably in some of Chapman's plays.  It is in reference
to this that in the great sonnet on Chapman, Shakespeare said to Willie
Hughes-

    But when your countenance fill'd up his line,
    Then lack'd I matter; that enfeebled mine-

the expression "when your countenance filled up his line" referring
obviously to the beauty of the young actor giving life and reality and
added charm to Chapman's verse, the same idea being also put forward in
the 79th Sonnet-

    Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,
    My verse alone had all thy gentle grace;
    But now my gracious numbers are decay'd,
    And my sick Muse doth give another place;

and in the immediately preceding sonnet, where Shakespeare says-

          Every alien pen has got my _use_
    And under thee their poesy disperse,

the play upon words (use=Hughes) being of course obvious, and the phrase
"under thee their poesy disperse," meaning "by your assistance as an
actor bring their plays before the people."

'It was a wonderful evening, and we sat up almost till dawn reading and
re-reading the Sonnets.  After some time, however, I began to see that
before the theory could be placed before the world in a really perfected
form, it was necessary to get some independent evidence about the
existence of this young actor, Willie Hughes.  If this could be once
established, there could be no possible doubt about his identity with Mr.
W. H.; but otherwise the theory would fall to the ground.  I put this
forward very strongly to Cyril, who was a good deal annoyed at what he
called my Philistine tone of mind, and indeed was rather bitter upon the
subject.  However, I made him promise that in his own interest he would
not publish his discovery till he had put the whole matter beyond the
reach of doubt; and for weeks and weeks we searched the registers of City
churches, the Alleyn MSS. at Dulwich, the Record Office, the papers of
the Lord Chamberlain-everything, in fact, that we thought might contain
some allusion to Willie Hughes.  We discovered nothing, of course, and
every day the existence of Willie Hughes seemed to me to become more
problematical.  Cyril was in a dreadful state, and used to go over the
whole question day after day, entreating me to believe; but I saw the one
flaw in the theory, and I refused to be convinced till the actual
existence of Willie Hughes, a boy-actor of Elizabethan days, had been
placed beyond the reach of doubt or cavil.

'One day Cyril left town to stay with his grandfather, I thought at the
time, but I afterwards heard from Lord Crediton that this was not the
case; and about a fortnight afterwards I received a telegram from him,
handed in at Warwick, asking me to be sure to come and dine with him that
evening at eight o'clock.  When I arrived, he said to me, "The only
apostle who did not deserve proof was St. Thomas, and St. Thomas was the
only apostle who got it."  I asked him what he meant.  He answered that
he had not merely been able to establish the existence in the sixteenth
century of a boy-actor of the name of Willie Hughes, but to prove by the
most conclusive evidence that he was the Mr. W. H. of the Sonnets.  He
would not tell me anything more at the time; but after dinner he solemnly
produced the picture I showed you, and told me that he had discovered it
by the merest chance nailed to the side of an old chest that he had
bought at a farmhouse in Warwickshire.  The chest itself, which was a
very fine example of Elizabethan work, he had, of course, brought with
him, and in the centre of the front panel the initials W. H. were
undoubtedly carved.  It was this monogram that had attracted his
attention, and he told me that it was not till he had had the chest in
his possession for several days that he had thought of making any careful
examination of the inside.  One morning, however, he saw that one of the
sides of the chest was much thicker than the other, and looking more
closely, he discovered that a framed panel picture was clamped against
it.  On taking it out, he found it was the picture that is now lying on
the sofa.  It was very dirty, and covered with mould; but he managed to
clean it, and, to his great joy, saw that he had fallen by mere chance on
the one thing for which he had been looking.  Here was an authentic
portrait of Mr. W. H., with his hand resting on the dedicatory page of
the Sonnets, and on the frame itself could be faintly seen the name of
the young man written in black uncial letters on a faded gold ground,
"Master Will. Hews."

'Well, what was I to say?  It never occurred to me for a moment that
Cyril Graham was playing a trick on me, or that he was trying to prove
his theory by means of a forgery.'

'But is it a forgery?' I asked.

'Of course it is,' said Erskine.  'It is a very good forgery; but it is a
forgery none the less.  I thought at the time that Cyril was rather calm
about the whole matter; but I remember he more than once told me that he
himself required no proof of the kind, and that he thought the theory
complete without it.  I laughed at him, and told him that without it the
theory would fall to the ground, and I warmly congratulated him on the
marvellous discovery.  We then arranged that the picture should be etched
or facsimiled, and placed as the frontispiece to Cyril's edition of the
Sonnets; and for three months we did nothing but go over each poem line
by line, till we had settled every difficulty of text or meaning.  One
unlucky day I was in a print-shop in Holborn, when I saw upon the counter
some extremely beautiful drawings in silver-point.  I was so attracted by
them that I bought them; and the proprietor of the place, a man called
Rawlings, told me that they were done by a young painter of the name of
Edward Merton, who was very clever, but as poor as a church mouse.  I
went to see Merton some days afterwards, having got his address from the
printseller, and found a pale, interesting young man, with a rather
common-looking wife-his model, as I subsequently learned.  I told him how
much I admired his drawings, at which he seemed very pleased, and I asked
him if he would show me some of his other work.  As we were looking over
a portfolio, full of really very lovely things,-for Merton had a most
delicate and delightful touch,-I suddenly caught sight of a drawing of
the picture of Mr. W. H.  There was no doubt whatever about it.  It was
almost a _facsimile_-the only difference being that the two masks of
Tragedy and Comedy were not suspended from the marble table as they are
in the picture, but were lying on the floor at the young man's feet.
"Where on earth did you get that?" I said.  He grew rather confused, and
said-"Oh, that is nothing.  I did not know it was in this portfolio.  It
is not a thing of any value."  "It is what you did for Mr. Cyril Graham,"
exclaimed his wife; "and if this gentleman wishes to buy it, let him have
it."  "For Mr. Cyril Graham?" I repeated.  "Did you paint the picture of
Mr. W. H.?"  "I don't understand what you mean," he answered, growing
very red.  Well, the whole thing was quite dreadful.  The wife let it all
out.  I gave her five pounds when I was going away.  I can't bear to
think of it now; but of course I was furious.  I went off at once to
Cyril's chambers, waited there for three hours before he came in, with
that horrid lie staring me in the face, and told him I had discovered his
forgery.  He grew very pale and said-"I did it purely for your sake.  You
would not be convinced in any other way.  It does not affect the truth of
the theory."  "The truth of the theory!" I exclaimed; "the less we talk
about that the better.  You never even believed in it yourself.  If you
had, you would not have committed a forgery to prove it."  High words
passed between us; we had a fearful quarrel.  I dare say I was unjust.
The next morning he was dead.'

'Dead!' I cried,

'Yes; he shot himself with a revolver.  Some of the blood splashed upon
the frame of the picture, just where the name had been painted.  By the
time I arrived-his servant had sent for me at once-the police were
already there.  He had left a letter for me, evidently written in the
greatest agitation and distress of mind.'

'What was in it?' I asked.

'Oh, that he believed absolutely in Willie Hughes; that the forgery of
the picture had been done simply as a concession to me, and did not in
the slightest degree invalidate the truth of the theory; and, that in
order to show me how firm and flawless his faith in the whole thing was,
he was going to offer his life as a sacrifice to the secret of the
Sonnets.  It was a foolish, mad letter.  I remember he ended by saying
that he intrusted to me the Willie Hughes theory, and that it was for me
to present it to the world, and to unlock the secret of Shakespeare's
heart.'

'It is a most tragic story,' I cried; 'but why have you not carried out
his wishes?'

Erskine shrugged his shoulders.  'Because it is a perfectly unsound
theory from beginning to end,' he answered.

'My dear Erskine,' I said, getting up from my seat, 'you are entirely
wrong about the whole matter.  It is the only perfect key to
Shakespeare's Sonnets that has ever been made.  It is complete in every
detail.  I believe in Willie Hughes.'

'Don't say that,' said Erskine gravely; 'I believe there is something
fatal about the idea, and intellectually there is nothing to be said for
it.  I have gone into the whole matter, and I assure you the theory is
entirely fallacious.  It is plausible up to a certain point.  Then it
stops.  For heaven's sake, my dear boy, don't take up the subject of
Willie Hughes.  You will break your heart over it.'

'Erskine,' I answered, 'it is your duty to give this theory to the world.
If you will not do it, I will.  By keeping it back you wrong the memory
of Cyril Graham, the youngest and the most splendid of all the martyrs of
literature.  I entreat you to do him justice.  He died for this
thing,-don't let his death be in vain.'

Erskine looked at me in amazement.  'You are carried away by the
sentiment of the whole story,' he said.  'You forget that a thing is not
necessarily true because a man dies for it.  I was devoted to Cyril
Graham.  His death was a horrible blow to me.  I did not recover it for
years.  I don't think I have ever recovered it.  But Willie Hughes?
There is nothing in the idea of Willie Hughes.  No such person ever
existed.  As for bringing the whole thing before the world-the world
thinks that Cyril Graham shot himself by accident.  The only proof of his
suicide was contained in the letter to me, and of this letter the public
never heard anything.  To the present day Lord Crediton thinks that the
whole thing was accidental.'

'Cyril Graham sacrificed his life to a great Idea,' I answered; 'and if
you will not tell of his martyrdom, tell at least of his faith.'

'His faith,' said Erskine, 'was fixed in a thing that was false, in a
thing that was unsound, in a thing that no Shakespearean scholar would
accept for a moment.  The theory would be laughed at.  Don't make a fool
of yourself, and don't follow a trail that leads nowhere.  You start by
assuming the existence of the very person whose existence is the thing to
be proved.  Besides, everybody knows that the Sonnets were addressed to
Lord Pembroke.  The matter is settled once for all.'

'The matter is not settled!' I exclaimed.  'I will take up the theory
where Cyril Graham left it, and I will prove to the world that he was
right.'

'Silly boy!' said Erskine.  'Go home: it is after two, and don't think
about Willie Hughes any more.  I am sorry I told you anything about it,
and very sorry indeed that I should have converted you to a thing in
which I don't believe.'

'You have given me the key to the greatest mystery of modern literature,'
I answered; 'and I shall not rest till I have made you recognise, till I
have made everybody recognise, that Cyril Graham was the most subtle
Shakespearean critic of our day.'

As I walked home through St. James's Park the dawn was just breaking over
London.  The white swans were lying asleep on the polished lake, and the
gaunt Palace looked purple against the pale-green sky.  I thought of
Cyril Graham, and my eyes filled with tears.



CHAPTER II


IT was past twelve o'clock when I awoke, and the sun was streaming in
through the curtains of my room in long slanting beams of dusty gold.  I
told my servant that I would be at home to no one; and after I had had a
cup of chocolate and a _petit-pain_, I took down from the book-shelf my
copy of Shakespeare's Sonnets, and began to go carefully through them.
Every poem seemed to me to corroborate Cyril Graham's theory.  I felt as
if I had my hand upon Shakespeare's heart, and was counting each separate
throb and pulse of passion.  I thought of the wonderful boy-actor, and
saw his face in every line.

Two sonnets, I remember, struck me particularly: they were the 53rd and
the 67th.  In the first of these, Shakespeare, complimenting Willie
Hughes on the versatility of his acting, on his wide range of parts, a
range extending from Rosalind to Juliet, and from Beatrice to Ophelia,
says to him-

    What is your substance, whereof are you made,
    That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
    Since every one hath, every one, one shade,
    And you, but one, can every shadow lend-

lines that would be unintelligible if they were not addressed to an
actor, for the word 'shadow' had in Shakespeare's day a technical meaning
connected with the stage.  'The best in this kind are but shadows,' says
Theseus of the actors in the _Midsummer Night's Dream_, and there are
many similar allusions in the literature of the day.  These sonnets
evidently belonged to the series in which Shakespeare discusses the
nature of the actor's art, and of the strange and rare temperament that
is essential to the perfect stage-player.  'How is it,' says Shakespeare
to Willie Hughes, 'that you have so many personalities?' and then he goes
on to point out that his beauty is such that it seems to realise every
form and phase of fancy, to embody each dream of the creative
imagination-an idea that is still further expanded in the sonnet that
immediately follows, where, beginning with the fine thought,

    O, how much more doth beauty beauteous seem
    By that sweet ornament which _truth_ doth give!

Shakespeare invites us to notice how the truth of acting, the truth of
visible presentation on the stage, adds to the wonder of poetry, giving
life to its loveliness, and actual reality to its ideal form.  And yet,
in the 67th Sonnet, Shakespeare calls upon Willie Hughes to abandon the
stage with its artificiality, its false mimic life of painted face and
unreal costume, its immoral influences and suggestions, its remoteness
from the true world of noble action and sincere utterance.

    Ah, wherefore with infection should he live
    And with his presence grace impiety,
    That sin by him advantage should achieve
    And lace itself with his society?
    Why should false painting imitate his cheek,
    And steal dead seeming of his living hue?
    Why should poor beauty indirectly seek
    Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?

It may seem strange that so great a dramatist as Shakespeare, who
realised his own perfection as an artist and his humanity as a man on the
ideal plane of stage-writing and stage-playing, should have written in
these terms about the theatre; but we must remember that in Sonnets CX.
and CXI. Shakespeare shows us that he too was wearied of the world of
puppets, and full of shame at having made himself 'a motley to the view.'
The 111th Sonnet is especially bitter:-

    O, for my sake do you with Fortune chide,
    The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
    That did not better for my life provide
    Than public means which public manners breeds.
    Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,
    And almost thence my nature is subdued
    To what it works in, like the dyer's hand:
    Pity me then and wish I were renew'd-

and there are many signs elsewhere of the same feeling, signs familiar to
all real students of Shakespeare.

One point puzzled me immensely as I read the Sonnets, and it was days
before I struck on the true interpretation, which indeed Cyril Graham
himself seems to have missed.  I could not understand how it was that
Shakespeare set so high a value on his young friend marrying.  He himself
had married young, and the result had been unhappiness, and it was not
likely that he would have asked Willie Hughes to commit the same error.
The boy-player of Rosalind had nothing to gain from marriage, or from the
passions of real life.  The early sonnets, with their strange entreaties
to have children, seemed to me a jarring note.  The explanation of the
mystery came on me quite suddenly, and I found it in the curious
dedication.  It will be remembered that the dedication runs as follows:-

                           TO THE ONLIE BEGETTER OF
                            THESE INSUING SONNETS
                           MR. W. H. ALL HAPPINESSE
                              AND THAT ETERNITIE
                                   PROMISED
                                      BY
                             OUR EVER-LIVING POET
                                   WISHETH
                               THE WELL-WISHING
                                ADVENTURER IN
                                   SETTING
                                    FORTH.

                                                                     T. T.

Some scholars have supposed that the word 'begetter' in this dedication
means simply the procurer of the Sonnets for Thomas Thorpe the publisher;
but this view is now generally abandoned, and the highest authorities are
quite agreed that it is to be taken in the sense of inspirer, the
metaphor being drawn from the analogy of physical life.  Now I saw that
the same metaphor was used by Shakespeare himself all through the poems,
and this set me on the right track.  Finally I made my great discovery.
The marriage that Shakespeare proposes for Willie Hughes is the marriage
with his Muse, an expression which is definitely put forward in the 82nd
Sonnet, where, in the bitterness of his heart at the defection of the
boy-actor for whom he had written his greatest parts, and whose beauty
had indeed suggested them, he opens his complaint by saying-

    I grant thou wert not married to my Muse.

The children he begs him to beget are no children of flesh and blood, but
more immortal children of undying fame.  The whole cycle of the early
sonnets is simply Shakespeare's invitation to Willie Hughes to go upon
the stage and become a player.  How barren and profitless a thing, he
says, is this beauty of yours if it be not used:-

    When forty winters shall besiege thy brow
    And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
    Thy youth's proud livery, so gazed on now,
    Will be a tatter'd weed, of small worth held:
    Then being ask'd where all thy beauty lies,
    Where all the treasure of thy lusty days,
    To say, within thine own deep-sunken eyes,
    Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.

You must create something in art: my verse 'is thine, and _born_ of
thee'; only listen to me, and I will '_bring forth_ eternal numbers to
outlive long date,' and you shall people with forms of your own image the
imaginary world of the stage.  These children that you beget, he
continues, will not wither away, as mortal children do, but you shall
live in them and in my plays: do but-

    Make thee another self, for love of me,
    That beauty still may live in thine or thee.

I collected all the passages that seemed to me to corroborate this view,
and they produced a strong impression on me, and showed me how complete
Cyril Graham's theory really was.  I also saw that it was quite easy to
separate those lines in which he speaks of the Sonnets themselves from
those in which he speaks of his great dramatic work.  This was a point
that had been entirely overlooked by all critics up to Cyril Graham's
day.  And yet it was one of the most important points in the whole series
of poems.  To the Sonnets Shakespeare was more or less indifferent.  He
did not wish to rest his fame on them.  They were to him his 'slight
Muse,' as he calls them, and intended, as Meres tells us, for private
circulation only among a few, a very few, friends.  Upon the other hand
he was extremely conscious of the high artistic value of his plays, and
shows a noble self-reliance upon his dramatic genius.  When he says to
Willie Hughes:

    But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
    Nor lose possession of that fair thou owest;
    Nor shall Death brag thou wander'st in his shade,
    When in _eternal lines_ to time thou grow'st:
    So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
    So long lives this, and this gives life to thee;-

the expression 'eternal lines' clearly alludes to one of his plays that
he was sending him at the time, just as the concluding couplet points to
his confidence in the probability of his plays being always acted.  In
his address to the Dramatic Muse (Sonnets C. and CI.), we find the same
feeling.

    Where art thou, Muse, that thou forget'st so long
    To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
    Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song,
    Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?

he cries, and he then proceeds to reproach the Mistress of Tragedy and
Comedy for her 'neglect of Truth in Beauty dyed,' and says-

    Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
    Excuse not silence so, for 't lies in thee
    To make him much outlive a gilded tomb
    And to be praised of ages yet to be.
    Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how
    To make him seem long hence as he shows now.

It is, however, perhaps in the 55th Sonnet that Shakespeare gives to this
idea its fullest expression.  To imagine that the 'powerful rhyme' of the
second line refers to the sonnet itself, is to mistake Shakespeare's
meaning entirely.  It seemed to me that it was extremely likely, from the
general character of the sonnet, that a particular play was meant, and
that the play was none other but _Romeo and Juliet_.

    Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
    Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;
    But you shall shine more bright in these contents
    Than unswept stone besmear'd with sluttish time.
    When wasteful wars shall statues overturn,
    And broils root out the work of masonry,
    Nor Mars his sword nor war's quick fire shall burn
    The living record of your memory.
    'Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity
    Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room
    Even in the eyes of all posterity
    That wear this world out to the ending doom.
    So, till the judgement that yourself arise,
    You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes.

It was also extremely suggestive to note how here as elsewhere
Shakespeare promised Willie Hughes immortality in a form that appealed to
men's eyes-that is to say, in a spectacular form, in a play that is to be
looked at.

For two weeks I worked hard at the Sonnets, hardly ever going out, and
refusing all invitations.  Every day I seemed to be discovering something
new, and Willie Hughes became to me a kind of spiritual presence, an
ever-dominant personality.  I could almost fancy that I saw him standing
in the shadow of my room, so well had Shakespeare drawn him, with his
golden hair, his tender flower-like grace, his dreamy deep-sunken eyes,
his delicate mobile limbs, and his white lily hands.  His very name
fascinated me.  Willie Hughes!  Willie Hughes!  How musically it sounded!
Yes; who else but he could have been the master-mistress of Shakespeare's
passion, {1} the lord of his love to whom he was bound in vassalage, {2}
the delicate minion of pleasure, {3} the rose of the whole world, {4} the
herald of the spring {5} decked in the proud livery of youth, {6} the
lovely boy whom it was sweet music to hear, {7} and whose beauty was the
very raiment of Shakespeare's heart, {8} as it was the keystone of his
dramatic power?  How bitter now seemed the whole tragedy of his desertion
and his shame!-shame that he made sweet and lovely {9} by the mere magic
of his personality, but that was none the less shame.  Yet as Shakespeare
forgave him, should not we forgive him also?  I did not care to pry into
the mystery of his sin.

His abandonment of Shakespeare's theatre was a different matter, and I
investigated it at great length.  Finally I came to the conclusion that
Cyril Graham had been wrong in regarding the rival dramatist of the 80th
Sonnet as Chapman.  It was obviously Marlowe who was alluded to.  At the
time the Sonnets were written, such an expression as 'the proud full sail
of his great verse' could not have been used of Chapman's work, however
applicable it might have been to the style of his later Jacobean plays.
No: Marlowe was clearly the rival dramatist of whom Shakespeare spoke in
such laudatory terms; and that

                Affable familiar ghost
    Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,

was the Mephistopheles of his _Doctor Faustus_.  No doubt, Marlowe was
fascinated by the beauty and grace of the boy-actor, and lured him away
from the Blackfriars Theatre, that he might play the Gaveston of his
_Edward II_.  That Shakespeare had the legal right to retain Willie
Hughes in his own company is evident from Sonnet LXXXVII., where he
says:-

    Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
    And like enough thou know'st thy estimate:
    The _charter of thy worth_ gives thee releasing;
    My _bonds_ in thee are all determinate.
    For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?
    And for that riches where is my deserving?
    The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
    _And so my patent back again is swerving_.
    Thyself thou gayest, thy own worth then not knowing,
    Or me, to whom thou gavest it, else mistaking;
    So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,
    Comes home again, on better judgement making.
       Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter,
       In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.

But him whom he could not hold by love, he would not hold by force.
Willie Hughes became a member of Lord Pembroke's company, and, perhaps in
the open yard of the Red Bull Tavern, played the part of King Edward's
delicate minion.  On Marlowe's death, he seems to have returned to
Shakespeare, who, whatever his fellow-partners may have thought of the
matter, was not slow to forgive the wilfulness and treachery of the young
actor.

How well, too, had Shakespeare drawn the temperament of the stage-player!
Willie Hughes was one of those

    That do not do the thing they most do show,
    Who, moving others, are themselves as stone.

He could act love, but could not feel it, could mimic passion without
realising it.

    In many's looks the false heart's history
    Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange,

but with Willie Hughes it was not so.  'Heaven,' says Shakespeare, in a
sonnet of mad idolatry-

       Heaven in thy creation did decree
    That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;
    Whate'er thy thoughts or thy heart's workings be,
    Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell.

In his 'inconstant mind' and his 'false heart,' it was easy to recognise
the insincerity and treachery that somehow seem inseparable from the
artistic nature, as in his love of praise that desire for immediate
recognition that characterises all actors.  And yet, more fortunate in
this than other actors, Willie Hughes was to know something of
immortality.  Inseparably connected with Shakespeare's plays, he was to
live in them.

    Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
    Though I, once gone, to all the world must die:
    The earth can yield me but a common grave,
    When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie.
    Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
    Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read,
    And tongues to be your being shall rehearse,
    When all the breathers of this world are dead.

There were endless allusions, also, to Willie Hughes's power over his
audience-the 'gazers,' as Shakespeare calls them; but perhaps the most
perfect description of his wonderful mastery over dramatic art was in _A
Lover's Complaint_, where Shakespeare says of him:-

    In him a plenitude of subtle matter,
    Applied to cautels, all strange forms receives,
    Of burning blushes, or of weeping water,
    Or swooning paleness; and he takes and leaves,
    In either's aptness, as it best deceives,
    To blush at speeches rank, to weep at woes,
    Or to turn white and swoon at tragic shows.

                                  * * * * *

    So on the tip of his subduing tongue,
    All kind of arguments and questions deep,
    All replication prompt and reason strong,
    For his advantage still did wake and sleep,
    To make the weeper laugh, the laugher weep.
       He had the dialect and the different skill,
       Catching all passions in his craft of will.

Once I thought that I had really found Willie Hughes in Elizabethan
literature.  In a wonderfully graphic account of the last days of the
great Earl of Essex, his chaplain, Thomas Knell, tells us that the night
before the Earl died, 'he called William Hewes, which was his musician,
to play upon the virginals and to sing.  "Play," said he, "my song, Will
Hewes, and I will sing it to myself."  So he did it most joyfully, not as
the howling swan, which, still looking down, waileth her end, but as a
sweet lark, lifting up his hands and casting up his eyes to his God, with
this mounted the crystal skies, and reached with his unwearied tongue the
top of highest heavens.'  Surely the boy who played on the virginals to
the dying father of Sidney's Stella was none other but the Will Hews to
whom Shakespeare dedicated the Sonnets, and who he tells us was himself
sweet 'music to hear.'  Yet Lord Essex died in 1576, when Shakespeare
himself was but twelve years of age.  It was impossible that his musician
could have been the Mr. W. H. of the Sonnets.  Perhaps Shakespeare's
young friend was the son of the player upon the virginals?  It was at
least something to have discovered that Will Hews was an Elizabethan
name.  Indeed the name Hews seemed to have been closely connected with
music and the stage.  The first English actress was the lovely Margaret
Hews, whom Prince Rupert so madly loved.  What more probable than that
between her and Lord Essex's musician had come the boy-actor of
Shakespeare's plays?  But the proofs, the links-where were they?  Alas! I
could not find them.  It seemed to me that I was always on the brink of
absolute verification, but that I could never really attain to it.

From Willie Hughes's life I soon passed to thoughts of his death.  I used
to wonder what had been his end.

Perhaps he had been one of those English actors who in 1604 went across
sea to Germany and played before the great Duke Henry Julius of
Brunswick, himself a dramatist of no mean order, and at the Court of that
strange Elector of Brandenburg, who was so enamoured of beauty that he
was said to have bought for his weight in amber the young son of a
travelling Greek merchant, and to have given pageants in honour of his
slave all through that dreadful famine year of 1606-7, when the people
died of hunger in the very streets of the town, and for the space of
seven months there was no rain.  We know at any rate that _Romeo and
Juliet_ was brought out at Dresden in 1613, along with _Hamlet_ and _King
Lear_, and it was surely to none other than Willie Hughes that in 1615
the death-mask of Shakespeare was brought by the hand of one of the suite
of the English ambassador, pale token of the passing away of the great
poet who had so dearly loved him.  Indeed there would have been something
peculiarly fitting in the idea that the boy-actor, whose beauty had been
so vital an element in the realism and romance of Shakespeare's art,
should have been the first to have brought to Germany the seed of the new
culture, and was in his way the precursor of that _Aufkl"arung_ or
Illumination of the eighteenth century, that splendid movement which,
though begun by Lessing and Herder, and brought to its full and perfect
issue by Goethe, was in no small part helped on by another
actor-Friedrich Schroeder-who awoke the popular consciousness, and by
means of the feigned passions and mimetic methods of the stage showed the
intimate, the vital, connection between life and literature.  If this was
so-and there was certainly no evidence against it-it was not improbable
that Willie Hughes was one of those English comedians (_mimae quidam ex
Britannia_, as the old chronicle calls them), who were slain at Nuremberg
in a sudden uprising of the people, and were secretly buried in a little
vineyard outside the city by some young men 'who had found pleasure in
their performances, and of whom some had sought to be instructed in the
mysteries of the new art.'  Certainly no more fitting place could there
be for him to whom Shakespeare said, 'thou art all my art,' than this
little vineyard outside the city walls.  For was it not from the sorrows
of Dionysos that Tragedy sprang?  Was not the light laughter of Comedy,
with its careless merriment and quick replies, first heard on the lips of
the Sicilian vine-dressers?  Nay, did not the purple and red stain of the
wine-froth on face and limbs give the first suggestion of the charm and
fascination of disguise-the desire for self-concealment, the sense of the
value of objectivity thus showing itself in the rude beginnings of the
art?  At any rate, wherever he lay-whether in the little vineyard at the
gate of the Gothic town, or in some dim London churchyard amidst the roar
and bustle of our great city-no gorgeous monument marked his
resting-place.  His true tomb, as Shakespeare saw, was the poet's verse,
his true monument the permanence of the drama.  So had it been with
others whose beauty had given a new creative impulse to their age.  The
ivory body of the Bithynian slave rots in the green ooze of the Nile, and
on the yellow hills of the Cerameicus is strewn the dust of the young
Athenian; but Antinous lives in sculpture, and Charmides in philosophy.



CHAPTER III


AFTER three weeks had elapsed, I determined to make a strong appeal to
Erskine to do justice to the memory of Cyril Graham, and to give to the
world his marvellous interpretation of the Sonnets-the only
interpretation that thoroughly explained the problem.  I have not any
copy of my letter, I regret to say, nor have I been able to lay my hand
upon the original; but I remember that I went over the whole ground, and
covered sheets of paper with passionate reiteration of the arguments and
proofs that my study had suggested to me.  It seemed to me that I was not
merely restoring Cyril Graham to his proper place in literary history,
but rescuing the honour of Shakespeare himself from the tedious memory of
a commonplace intrigue.  I put into the letter all my enthusiasm.  I put
into the letter all my faith.

No sooner, in fact, had I sent it off than a curious reaction came over
me.  It seemed to me that I had given away my capacity for belief in the
Willie Hughes theory of the Sonnets, that something had gone out of me,
as it were, and that I was perfectly indifferent to the whole subject.
What was it that had happened?  It is difficult to say.  Perhaps, by
finding perfect expression for a passion, I had exhausted the passion
itself.  Emotional forces, like the forces of physical life, have their
positive limitations.  Perhaps the mere effort to convert any one to a
theory involves some form of renunciation of the power of credence.
Perhaps I was simply tired of the whole thing, and, my enthusiasm having
burnt out, my reason was left to its own unimpassioned judgment.  However
it came about, and I cannot pretend to explain it, there was no doubt
that Willie Hughes suddenly became to me a mere myth, an idle dream, the
boyish fancy of a young man who, like most ardent spirits, was more
anxious to convince others than to be himself convinced.

As I had said some very unjust and bitter things to Erskine in my letter,
I determined to go and see him at once, and to make my apologies to him
for my behaviour.  Accordingly, the next morning I drove down to Birdcage
Walk, and found Erskine sitting in his library, with the forged picture
of Willie Hughes in front of him.
